June 2016 Edition

Organ Donation.
Giving life a second chance.
W
hen you obtain your driver license, you will be asked, “Do you wish 
to be an organ donor?”  If you say “yes”, what does that mean?
•  “Yes” means that you want to give someone a very special gift…a second 
chance at life.  It means that you have decided to give organs or tissues 
after your death to people who urgently need a transplant.  The title 
“organ donor” with a red heart will appear on your license.
 s
d
n
as
u
o
h
t f
o
 s
n
et h
ti
w
 ylia
d s
w
o
r
g st
n
alp
s
n
art n
a
gr
o
 r
o
f d
e
e
n
 t
n
e
gr
u
 e
h
T  •
of people waiting nationally.  Someone is added to the list every ten 
minutes, and approximately 18 people will die each day while waiting for 
an organ.  Your choice to become an organ donor can make a life-saving 
difference for these critically ill people.
•  The decision to donate is a personal one, but one which should be shared 
with your family.  If you have questions, call the Alabama Organ Center 
at 1-800-252-3677.
Common Myths about Donation
Myth: Becoming a donor will affect my medical care if I am in an accident.
Fact: If you are admitted to a hospital, the number one priority is to save 
your life.
Myth: Organ donation disfigures the body.
Fact: Organs and tissues are removed in an operation performed by spe-
cially trained medical professionals. Your body is treated with respect and an 
open casket funeral is possible after donation.
Myth: If you agree to donate your family will be charged.
Fact: There is no financial cost to the donor’s family or estate for organ 
or tissue donation. Funeral costs and the costs incurred in saving your life 
remain the responsibility of the family.
Myth: Having “organ donor” on your driver’s license or carrying a donor card 
is all you have to do to become a donor.
Fact: While donation can legally occur with these documents, it is important 
to discuss your decision with your family to ensure they understand your 
wishes. All people who indicate their donation wishes on their driver’s license 
will have their name added to the Legacy Organ and Tissue Donor Registry.
For more information or to add your name to the registry, call 
1-800-252-3677 or visit www.alabamaorgancenter.org
MAKE THE CHOICE NOW TO HELP SAVE LIVES LATER.

Alabama 
DRIVER MANUAL 
PUBLISHED BY 
ALABAMA LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY 
LICENSE SERVICES DIVISION
P. O. BOX 1471 
MONTGOMERY, AL 36102-1471 
STAN STABLER
SECRETARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT 
JACK CLARK
DIRECTOR OF LAW ENFORCEMENT
SUPPORT SERVICES BUREAU
DEENA L. PREGNO 
CHIEF OF LICENSE SERVICES DIVISION
ALEA WEBSITE:  www.alea.gov 
KAY IVEY
GOVERNOR
HAL TAYLOR
        SECRETARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHARLES WARD
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR
DEENA PREGNO
DRIVER LICENSE DIVISION CHIEF

2 
A l A b A m A l Aw E n f o r c E m E n t A g E n c y 

 
A l A b A m A l Aw E n f o r c E m E n t A g E n c y 
3

4 
T a b l e o f C o n t e n t s
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1- Your License to Drive
License Requirements..........................5
Who Cannot Be Licensed...................6
Identification Requirements................6
Learner License /Restricted License.... 9
Vision Screening................................11
Knowledge Test..................................11
Road Test...........................................11
License Fees........................................13
Re-examination..................................13
Identification Cards (Non-Driver)....14
Renewing/Duplicating Your License.14
Change of Name, Address.................15
Class of License..................................16
Commercial License..........................16
Vessel License.....................................17
Present Your License..........................17
Chapter 2 - You May Lose 
Your License
Cancellation.......................................18
Revocation.........................................18
Suspension.........................................19
Alabama Point System.......................19
Chapter 3 - The Driving Task
Good Driving Habits........................21
Turns..................................................22
Sharing the Road with Bicycles.........24
Sharing the Road with
Motorcycles..................................26
Sharing the Road with Large
Vehicles........................................28
Parking...............................................29
Alabama’s Safety Belt and Child
Restraint Laws..............................31
Chapter 4 - The Driver
Your Personality Affects Your
Driving.........................................32
Cellular Phone/Texting Usage...........33
Highway Hypnosis and Fatigue.........33
Drinking and Driving........................33
Drugs.................................................36
How to Avoid Rear-End
Collisions.....................................37
Stopping Distance.............................37
What To Do If You Have A Crash....38
Railroad Crossings.............................39
Chapter 5 - Signs, Signals 
and Road Markings
Traffic Signs.......................................42
Regulatory Signs................................43
Warning Signs....................................45
Informational or Guide Signs............51
Pavement Markings...........................53
Traffic Signals.....................................55
Chapter 6 – Traffic Laws
Speed Limits......................................58
Stopping.............................................59
School Buses......................................60
Right of Way and Yielding................61
Passing................................................62
Pedestrians.........................................63
Following Emergency Vehicles..........65
Other Traffic Laws.............................65
Changing Lanes.................................65
Throwing Debris on Streets,
Highways...........................................66
Loads Must Conform to Law............66
Documents Required at Traffic
Stops..................................................66
Mandatory Liability Insurance Law..66
Window Tinting................................67
Gas Drive-Offs...................................67
Move Over Law.................................67
Chapter 7 - Adjust to 
Driving Conditions
Night Driving....................................68
Winter Driving..................................69
Windshield Wipers/Headlights.........70
Slippery Roads Are Hazardous..........70
Skidding.............................................70
Hydroplaning....................................71
Driving in Fog, Snow........................72
Driving in Hilly Country..................72
Carbon Monoxide.............................72
Driving Emergencies.........................72
Chapter 8 - Driving the Freeways
Entering the Freeway.........................75
Interchanges.......................................76
Leaving the Freeway...........................77
Chapter 9 - Your Vehicle
Maintaining Your Vehicle..................78
Additional Information
Parent Teen Driving Agreement........81
GDL Summary..................................83
Web Site or Contact..........................84 
Driver License 
Appointments.....Inside Back Cover

C H A P T E R  1 
YOUR LICENSE TO DRIVE
Under the laws of Alabama, every person (with some exceptions) must be 
licensed to operate a motor vehicle upon public streets and roadways. The 
Alabama Law Enforcement Agency, Driver License Services, issues driver 
licenses.
This chapter tells you who may qualify and what you must do to obtain an 
Alabama driver license. If applying for a motorcycle license, you should study 
the motorcycle manual.
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
Every Alabama resident who operates any motor vehicle (except a farm tractor 
or implement of husbandry temporarily upon any street or highway) must have 
a driver license. All applicants who have not been licensed in Alabama or whose 
Alabama license has been expired for over three years must pass the required driv-
er examination.  A holder of an out of state license which has not been expired 
over one year does not have to pass a driver examination.
AN ALABAMA DRIVER LICENSE IS NOT REQUIRED  
FOR THESE PEOPLE
The following persons may drive a motor vehicle upon the streets or high-
ways in Alabama without an Alabama driver license.
• Any person in the employ or service of the United States Federal Government 
while driving or operating a motor vehicle owned or leased by the United 
States Federal Government.
• Any person while driving any farm tractor or implement of husbandry tem-
porarily operated or moved on the highway.
• A resident at least 16 years old who has in his immediate possession a valid 
driver license issued to him in his home state or country. This includes mili-
tary personnel from other states and their families stationed in Alabama, 
even though their assignment in Alabama may be of long duration.
• A non-resident at least 16 years old whose home country does not require 
licensing of drivers may operate a motor vehicle as a driver of not more than 
90 days in any calendar year, if the vehicle operated is duly registered for the 
current year in the home country of the non-resident.
• A non-resident who has a valid driver license from the state of previous 
residence may drive without an Alabama license for 30 days after becoming 
a resident of the state.
• Any non-resident full time student properly enrolled and registered in a 
school, college, university, or trade school in this state, who holds a valid 
license from his home state or country.
 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
5

6 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
WHO CANNOT BE LICENSED
An Alabama driver license shall not be issued to:
• Persons under 16 years of age. 
• Any person whose driving rights or privilege is suspended or revoked in 
any state.
• Any person afflicted with or suffering from a physical or mental impair-
ment which, in the opinion of the ALEA or examining officer, will prevent 
such person from exercising reasonable and ordinary control over a motor 
vehicle.
• Any person failing to pass the examination when required.
• Any person who is a habitual drunkard or addicted to the use of narcotic 
drugs.
• Any person who is under the age of 19 that is not in compliance with 
Alabama Act 93-368, which requires secondary school graduation or cur-
rent attendance, with limited exclusions.
AUTHORIZED PRESENCE
All applicants for an original Alabama driver license or identification card 
must submit proof of authorized presence in the United States as authorized 
under federal law.  This will help us safeguard the accuracy and integrity of the 
Alabama Law Enforcement Driver License documents and reduce the high 
cost involved as a result of using fraudulent identification in obtaining goods 
and services.
A.	Identification Requirements
Applicants for an Alabama Driver License or Identification card must:
1.  Present two (2) forms of identification, at least one of which contains a 
photograph, (one form must be from the “Primary Listing”).
2. Present three (3) forms of non-photo identification (one form must be 
from the “Primary Listing”).
3. Applicants transferring an Out of State driver license must present their 
Out of State driver license, Social Security card (or one of the other 
acceptable documents for social security number) AND one other form 
from the “Primary Listing”.
For the purpose of administering the licensing of non-working 
authorized foreign national applicants for an Alabama driver license and 
non-driver identification cards, the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency 
presumes their status in the United States to be unauthorized until 
the applicant presents documents evidencing, to the satisfaction of the 
Department, that their presence in the United States is authorized.
In addition to the identification requirements above, an applicant who 
has been deported from the United States must present proof from the 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) that their legal presence status 
has been restored.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
7
B. Legal Date of Birth Requirements
All applicants for any type of Alabama driver license or non-driver identifi-
cation card must meet the age requirements relevant to the license or permit. 
A record existing on the driver license database, as a result of a previously 
issued Alabama driver license or Alabama non-driver identification card may 
be considered proof of birth date.  If no such record exists, only an original or 
certified copy of one of the “Primary Listed” documents could be accepted as 
proof of birth date.
C.	 Documentation Requirements
1. Only a document, which is an original or a copy certified by the issu-
ing agency, will be accepted.  If a document is a copy, the certification 
attached to it must be original.
2.	 A document would be unacceptable if:
(a)	 Correction fluid (white-out) has been used on pertinent informa- 	
 tion.
(b) Erasure markings appear on pertinent information.
(c) Pertinent information is missing.
(d) Pertinent information is illegible.
(e)	 Alterations appear in pertinent information.
(f ) A fold, crease, tear or hole obliterates or distorts pertinent informa-	
 tion
(g) A staple obliterates or distorts pertinent information.
(h) The document is not properly signed.
D. Social Security Number Requirements
1.	Proof of Social Security Number must be presented by the applicant 
under the following circumstances, unless the number is already in the 
database:
(a)		When applying for any class driver license, driver license renewal, 
vessel license, or non-driver identification card, whether or not the 
applicant wishes to have the number appear on the license.
2. An original of one of the following documents is required as proof of a 
Social Security number:
(a)		Social Security Card
(b)		A certified letter (on letterhead) from the Social Security 
Administration stating the person’s name and Social Security 
number.
(c)		United States Military Identification Card.
(d) United States Military form DD 214.
(e) 	Medicare/Medicaid Identification Card (if Social Security number 
is followed by the letter A).
(f ) W2 Tax Form.

8 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
E. Notarization Requirements
1.	 Notarized documents must meet the following requirements:
(a)	 The notary’s seal or stamp must be affixed to the document and 
must be legible.
(b)	 The notary’s name must be legible.
(c)	 The notary’s signature must be present.
(d)	 The complete date that the notary’s commission expires must be 
legible and must have been current on the date the document was 
notarized.
(e)	 The state in which the notary is commissioned must be legible.
F.  Acceptable documentation for proof of name, date of birth and autho-
rized presence documents must be original or copies certified by issuing 
agency.  Unless otherwise noted, documents must be current or be of the type 
that does not expire. Immigration documents must reflect at least 160 days 
allowable time remaining in the United States.
 All applicants under the age of 19 must present a current Student Enrollment/
Exclusion Form (DL-1-93). Forms may be obtained at your school or any driver 
license office. Forms must be completed and signed by authorized personnel.  
Social Security card (Required for all applicants who have been assigned and/
or are eligible for the assignment of a social security number by the Social Security 
Administration.)
PRIMARY DOCUMENTS
 (May include date of birth)
• Certified U.S. Birth Certificate issued by 
an agency designated by state or federal 
authority**
• US Passport* (current)
• Alabama Identification Card
• Alabama Driver License
• Certificate of Naturalization
• Certificate of Citizenship
• US Certificate of Birth Abroad
• Resident Alien Card
• Valid Foreign Passport with a valid United 
States Immigration Document
*  Not expired
** Required for all 15-year-old applicants 
under Title 36-6-8(b). Foreign-born applicants 
must have their birth certificate translated 
into English and certified by the Embassy 
of the country of issuance unless they have 
obtained a US Passport, which may be used to 
prove their date of birth
SECONDARY DOCUMENTS 
 (May not include date of birth)
• U.S. State Issued Driver License or 
	 Non- Driver ID Card
• Current International Driver License/Permit
• Marriage License
• US Armed Forces Driver License 
• US Military DD-214
• Professional License Issued by a State or 
Federal Agency
• Selective Service Card
• Veterans Administration
• Medical Insurance ID Card
• United States Military ID Card
• ID card issued by School with Photo
• School Enrollment Form (DL-1/93)
• Certified School Record 
Current Transcript
	
Most recent report card 
Certified Letter from School 
GED Certificate 
Certificate of Graduation
• W2 Tax Form along with a copy of the 
previous year’s filed tax forms
• Documents from Court of Record
	
Divorce Decree
	
Adoption Decree
	
Name Change Decree
	
Bankruptcy Decree.                   continued

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
9
FOREIGN EXAMINATIONS
Driver License written examinations are available in foreign languages: 
Arabic, Chinese, Farsi, French, German, Greek, Japanese, Korean, Russian, 
Spanish, Thai and Vietnamese.  Information on the administration of these 
tests may be obtained at the Driver License District Office.
HEARING IMPAIRED EXAMINATIONS
The Alabama Department of Rehabilitation Services, in cooperation 
with the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency, has made it possible for driver 
license written examinations to be administered to the hearing impaired in 
American Sign Language.  This is administered using our automated testing 
equipment and is available only at certain Driver License offices.  Information 
on the administration of these tests may be obtained at the Driver License 
District Office.
ORAL EXAMINATIONS
Examinations are available for applicants that are unable to read and com-
prehend the knowledge tests.  Oral Examinations may be administered using 
our automated testing equipment.
THE Learner LICENSE AND RESTRICTED LICENSE
Alabama Drivers License Graduated License law became effective October 
1, 2002. Contact your local driver license office for information or log on to 
www.alea.gov. The minimum driving age in Alabama is 16. There are certain 
exceptions and restrictions:
Learner License - Fifteen years old – Any person 15 years 
of age may obtain a restricted Learner License for the purpose of learn-
ing to safely and effectively operate a motor vehicle. The examination for the 
license is taken from information in the Alabama Driver Manual. Upon pass-
ing the required examination, the applicant will be issued a Class D Alabama 
driver license with a “Y” restriction. The “Y” restriction indicates that the holder 
may operate a motor vehicle while accompanied by a person who is 21 years
SECONDARY DOCUMENTS
continued
• Probation or release documents issued by State 
or Federal Departments of Correction with 
Photo ID cards issued by the same authority 
or Felon ID card issued by the Sheriff of the 
county of applicant’s residence
ADDITIONAL SECONDARY 
DOCUMENTS FOR NON-U.S. 
CITIZENS
• Employment Authorization Document - with 
a valid Social Security Card
 • †Valid Visa (with supporting documents) 
authorizing presence in the U.S. for a period 
exceeding 160 days.
• Valid I-94 Arrival/Departure Record issued by 
the DHS
• Original Form I-797, Notice of Action, issued 
by the DHS showing approval of change of 
status or extension of stay
• Original Form I-797, Notice of Action, issued 
by the DHS evidencing timely filing of an 
extension petition.
†ACCEPTABLE VISA 
CLASSIFICATIONS
(5a) Any person lawfully present in the United 
States in the following nonimmigrant 
categories is eligible to apply for an Alabama 
driver license/learner license/non-driver 
identification card/vessel license:  A, B, 
except B-1, E, F, G-4, H, I, J, K, L, M, 
NATO, O, P, Q, R, S, T, TN, TD, TPS or U 
or V visa categories.
Note:  F and M visa holders must also present 
Form I-20; J-1 and J-2 visa holders must also 
present Form DS-2019 or IAP-66.

10 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
of age or older and, who is duly licensed in this state or a licensed or certified driving 
instructor occupying the seat beside the operator. After the holder’s sixteenth birth-
day, the holder may operate a motor vehicle with any licensed driver occupying the seat 
beside the driver. This Learner License is valid for four years, and can be renewed once.
Learner License - Sixteen years old - Any person 16 years of 
age or older who, except for his lack of instruction in operating a motor vehicle, 
would otherwise be qualified to obtain a driver license, may obtain a Learner 
License upon passing the required examination. The examination for this 
license is taken from information in the Alabama Driver Manual. After passing 
the required examination, the applicant will be issued a Class D Alabama driver 
license with a “Y” restriction. The “Y” restriction indicates that the holder 
may operate a motor vehicle with a licensed driver occupying the seat 
beside the driver. This license is valid for four years.
A Learner License may be suspended or revoked in the same manner and for 
the same cause as a driver license and may also be revoked for any violations of 
the terms and conditions on which it was issued.
Driver License - Any person 16 years of age but under 18 years of 
age who has held a Learner License (to include a comparable license issued by 
another state) for six months or until their 18th birthday and has developed the 
necessary skills to safely operate a motor vehicle may present himself to his local 
driver license examiner for the road test. He must surrender his Learner License 
at the time of the road test. Upon passing the road test, the applicant will be 
issued a new regular license with the “Y” restriction removed for the remainder 
of the four- year period. This will be at no cost to the applicant.
Motor Driven Cycle License - Fourteen and 15 year old 
– Any person 14 or 15 years of age may obtain a restricted license to oper-
ate a motor driven cycle weighing not more than 200 pounds, nor exceeding 
150cc engine displacement. The examination for this license is taken from the 
Alabama Motorcycle Manual. Upon passing the required examination, the 
applicant will be issued a Class M Alabama driver license with a “B” restriction. 
The “B” restriction indicates that the holder may operate a motor driven cycle 
only. This license is valid for four years.
Motorcycle License - Sixteen years old and older – Any 
person 16 years of age or older may obtain a license to operate a motor-
cycle. A motorcycle is defined as a motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for 
the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels 
in contact with the ground but excluding a tractor. The examination for 
this license is taken from the Alabama Motorcycle Manual. Upon passing 
the required examination, the applicant will be issued a Class M Alabama 
driver license. Class M indicates that the holder may operate a motorcycle 
only. The license is valid for four years.
In addition to the above licenses, the Director of ALEA has the author-
ity to impose restrictions on your driver license when it appears that these 
restrictions are necessary for you to operate a motor vehicle safely. A com-
mon restriction is the requirement of wearing corrective lenses while driv-
ing. Another is the use of mechanical devices that aid physically impaired 
persons. Operation of a motor vehicle in violation of restrictions may result 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
11
in the loss of your license.
Vessel License–Any person 12 years of age or older may obtain a 
vessel license upon passing the required vessel examination at your local driver 
license office.  You may also present an approved Certificate of Completion of 
a Boating Safety Course.  Applicant must meet identification requirements.
VISION SCREENING
Those restricted to corrective lenses must wear them when taking the road 
test.
If, as a result of the vision examination, it is found that lenses are needed to 
improve eyesight, you will be required to wear corrective lenses while driving. 
If you don’t pass your vision examination, you will be required to have your eyes 
examined by a licensed eye specialist and return the report to the examiner.  If 
the report shows that you can see well enough to operate a motor vehicle safely, 
you will be allowed to take the remainder of the test.
knowledge TEST
The fee for each knowledge test is $5.00, no checks accepted.  This test 
contains questions on Alabama traffic laws, road signs, and rules of safe driv-
ing. The test will be taken from material found in this booklet.  This manual is 
available on our web site: www.alea.gov/driver license/manuals.
If you are applying for a learner license and pass the knowldege test, the 
examiner will issue your learner license upon payment of the required fee. 
If you are applying for a regular driver license and pass the road test, you will 
be issued your driver license upon payment of the required fee
If you are applying for a motor driven cycle license and a learner license, 
you will be required to take both the motor driven cycle and the learner license 
examination.
If you are applying for a motor driven cycle or a motorcycle license, you will 
need to study the material found in the motorcycle manual. You may pick this 
manual up at a Driver License Examining Office, State Trooper Office, Probate 
Judge or License Commissioner Office.
Automated testing is available to all applicants taking the driver license 
knowledge test.
THE ROAD TEST
The road test is the final step toward qualifying for the privilege of driv-
ing on public streets and highways. A driver license examiner will administer 
the road test. You must furnish a vehicle for the road test.  Sixteen year old 
applicants must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.  A seventeen year 
old applicant doesn’t have to be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
The examiner will check the vehicle before the test begins. It must be in safe 
operating condition and have the required equipment or the road test will not 

12 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
be administered. You must furnish a vehicle with required documents, proof 
of insurance and vehicle registration, for the road test.      
The equipment required for the examination includes rear view mirror, 
horn, windshield wipers, two separate methods of applying brakes, muffler, 
headlights, rear tail lights, valid license plate, stop light, directional signals, seat 
belts, and, if applicable, window tint compliance sticker. The license examiner 
may refuse to give the road test in event of hazardous weather, road conditions 
or an inability to effectively communicate.
The driving test will determine your ability to operate a motor vehicle prop-
erly under traffic conditions. Ordinary maneuvers may include:
• Right and left turns
• Signaling (hand or approved electrical devices)
• Use of marked and unmarked lanes of traffic 
• Backing of vehicle
• Observance of traffic signs and signals
• Making a quick stop
• General control of vehicle
• Observation
• Three point turn. Stop vehicle at right edge of curb. When safe, make 
sharp left turn; back vehicle. Move forward in right lane. Do not bump 
curb or use driveway. 
• Parking (uphill or downhill)
During the test, you should turn your head when you observe traffic and 
look over your right shoulder while backing to indicate to the examiner you are 
aware of conditions around you. The examiner must mark items during the test 
indicating “acceptable” or “needs training.” Do not be distracted by the scoring, 
as it does not indicate you are receiving all bad marks. No passengers or pets are 
permitted in the vehicle during the road test. Loose items like cameras or radios 
should not be in the car during the road test.
Causes for immediate failure and termination of the road test are:
• Violation of a traffic law.
• A dangerous action.
• Any accident which you could have prevented, regardless of legal fault.
• Lack of cooperation or a refusal to perform any maneuver.
If you fail the test, you will be allowed to try again after you have had time 
to improve your driving skills. 
Unless you already have a legal right to drive in Alabama, you must come for 
the road test in a vehicle driven by a licensed driver. The licensed driver must 
remain to drive the vehicle away if you fail.
When you have passed all tests, had your photo taken, and paid the required 
fees, you will receive a temporary license with your photo that gives you the 
privilege of driving a motor vehicle. You will receive your permanent license by 
mail. We must have your current mailing address to receive your license. The 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
13
license must be carried on your person at all times while driving.
License Fees 
 Class A Commercial License	
$66.25
Class B Commercial License	
$56.25
Class C Commercial License	
$36.25
CDL Permit	
$36.25
Class D Operator License	
$36.25
Motor Driven Cycle License	
$36.25
Motorcycle License	
$36.25
Learner License	
$36.25
Duplicate License	
$31.25
Identification Cards	
$36.25
	 License fees shown above are 
subject to change and will be slightly 
higher in counties where local 
legislation permits a higher fee.
The minimum age requirements for Alabama Driver License and Non-
Driver Identification cards are as follows:
TYPE  
AGE  
Identification Card  
No Age Requirement 
Class D Learner License  
15 years old  
Class D  
16 years old  
Motor Driven Cycle  
14 years old  
Vessel License  
12 years old  
CDL Class A Unrestricted  
21 years old  
CDL Class B Unrestricted  
21 years old  
CDL Class B Restricted  
18 years old  
CDL Class C  
21 years old  
RE-EXAMINATION
When it appears that you have some physical or mental impairment 
which might affect your driving ability, you may be required to furnish a 
statement from a doctor showing your medical history and present condi-
tion as it pertains to your driving ability.
Under some circumstances, you may be required to appear before a driver 
license examiner at any time after you have been issued a license to prove your 
ability to drive a motor vehicle. If you fail to report for such a driver test or fail 
to submit any required statements from your doctor, your driver license can be 
revoked.
Schedule DL Appointment on line, visit:
 www.alea.gov/driver license/Schedule DL Appointment
KNOWLDEGE TEST FEES
Commercial Knowledge Test
$25.00
Class D Operator
$5.00
Learner License
$5.00
Motorcycle License
$5.00
Vessel License
$5.00

14 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
IDENTIFICATION CARDS (NON-DRIVER)
A citizen of Alabama may apply to the local driver license examiner for 
a non-driver identification card. The same degree of proof of identifica-
tion required of applicants for driver licenses in the state shall be required 
of applicants for non-driver identification cards. Identification cards are 
issued to applicants who do not physically qualify for a driver license, do 
not have a current Alabama driver license, or who wish to discontinue driv-
ing and surrender their license. The non-driver identification card bears 
a number and the name, date of birth, address, description of the person, 
and a color photo. The Identification Cards are available wherever driver 
licenses are available. 
RENEWING YOUR LICENSE
Your driver license expires four years after it is issued and the expira-
tion date is shown on the license. The license may be renewed at any time 
within 60 days prior expiration at the Offices of Probate Judge, License 
Commissioner’s Offices, DL Examining Offices, Self-Serve Kiosks or 
Alabama On-Line Driver License Issuance System.
Military personnel, their dependents, students attending college, or 
other licensed Alabama drivers who are temporarily out of state due to 
their job requirement may be eligible to apply if you have obtained an 
Alabama driver license with your picture and signature in the last four 
years.  Application available on www.alea.gov/driver license/forms/duplicate 
license or out of state renewal
Complete the application for a Renewal or Duplicate License for 
Alabama Drivers who are Temporary out of State Military Personnel, 
Military Dependents, or College Students. Please see form for special 
instructions.  Submit the required fee of $36.25 for renewal license or 
$31.25 for duplicate license by money order payable to the Driver License 
Services. No personal checks. Mail to Driver License Services, Alabama 
Law Enforcement Agency, PO Box 1471, Montgomery, Al 36102-1471. 
A license will be issued, provided a current photo and signature are on file 
and mailed to the licensee’s out-of-state address. An Alabama address must 
appear on the Alabama driver license.
Alabama law provides a grace period of 60 days after expiration date 
of a driver license for the purpose of driver license renewal and the driver 
license shall be valid for this time period. An Alabama driver license may 
be renewed without examination within a 3-year period after expiration. A 
license issued under these circumstances will be valid for a four-year period 
from the last expiration date instead of four years from date of issue. Even 
though license renewal is possible up to three years after expiration, a per-
son cannot legally operate a motor vehicle with an expired license.
DUPLICATING YOUR LICENSE
If your license is lost, destroyed, or becomes illegible, but has not yet 

expired, you should apply for a duplicate license at your Probate Judge or 
License Commissioner Office. No examination is necessary but proof of 
identity such as a certified birth certificate is required at time of application.
Any person making a false affidavit in obtaining a duplicate driver license 
may be charged with Forgery (Title 13A-9-3), Perjury (Title 13A-10-102) 
or both under the Criminal Code of Alabama and punished accordingly by 
fine, imprisonment or both.
ALABAMA ONLINE DRIVER LICENSE ISSUANCE AT www.alea.gov 
quicklink www.alabama.gov OR SELF-SERVE KIOSKS
You may choose to renew or replace your driver license or state ID online. 
www.alabama.gov. Self-serve kiosks available in driver license examining 
offices to renew driver license, non-driver ids, or order a duplicate license or 
state ID. To change your address or to add or remove license classes, restric-
tions and endorsements must see a driver license examiner. Alabama driver 
license and non-driver identification cards will not be forwarded to another 
address.
Digital licensing for smart phones: Smart phones may download a digital 
license to show as a secure form of identification. (Online renewal required 
for digital license).
CHANGE OF NAME,  CHANGE OF ADDRESS
If you wish to change your name, you should present proper docu-
ments (marriage certificate or court order) to your probate judge or license 
commissioner. A duplicate fee will be charged for a corrected license. 
Commercial Driver License operators must go to a Driver License Office.
After changing your address within Alabama, you have 30 days 
in which to notify the License Services Division of the new address. An 
Alabama citizen with a driver license or identification card may update 
their address without charge on their state driver record.  A new license or 
card, however, will not be reissued. Visit the department’s website, www.
alea.gov/driver license/change of address form for a change of address 
form. Please complete and mail this form to: Alabama Law Enforcement 
Agency, License Services Division, PO Box 1471, Montgomery AL 36102-
1471.
To change your address on your Alabama driver license or Alabama 
Non-driver identification card, you must appear in person at the local 
Driver License Examining Office, Judge of Probate Office or License 
Commissioner’s Office.  A $31.25 fee will be charged for the corrected, 
duplicate license. Before leaving the office, be sure and verify your correct 
mailing address to ensure you will receive your license or non-driver iden-
tification card.  Alabama driver licenses and non-driver identification 
cards are not forwarded.
 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
15

16 
C h a p t e r 1 / Y o u r L i c e n s e t o  D r i v e 
DETERMINING WHICH CLASS OF LICENSE YOU NEED
CLASS OF LICENSE
Special endorsement may be needed for Classes A, B, C
Combination vehicles
GCWR over 26,000 lbs.
Towed vehicle(s) over 10,000 lbs.  
Trucks or buses over 26,000 lbs. GVWR
Any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in  
excess of 10,000 lbs. GVWR    
Vehicles weighing 26,000 lbs. GVWR or 
less:
-Placarded for hazardous materials
-Designed to seat more than 15 people 
including driver    
Generally, all passenger vehicles, except 
vehicle in Classes A, B, C, or M   
Motorcycles and motor-driven cycles
Motorized watercraft 
A
B
C
D
M
V
If you want to get a license to drive this 
type of vehicle or a similar type vehicle 
SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS MAY APPLY
	
  
COMMERCIAL DRIVER LICENSE
Alabama adopted the Federal Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 
1986 and is part of a nationally uniform system of classifying, testing, and 
licensing commercial vehicle drivers.
If you drive a commercial vehicle that falls into one of the following 
classifications, you must secure an Alabama Commercial Driver License 
(CDL).
CLASS A - This classification applies only to “combination” vehicles 
with a Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) exceeding 26,000 
pounds, provided the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of the vehicle 
being towed exceeds 10,000 pounds. 
The holder of a Class A license, which includes any appropriate endorse-
ments, may operate all vehicles included in Class B, C, & D.
CLASS B - This class includes single or combination vehicles where 
the GVWR of the single vehicle exceeds 26,000 pounds. The vehicle in 
tow must not exceed 10,000 pounds. Class B licensees, with appropriate 
endorsements, may drive all vehicles in Class C or D.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
17
CLASS C - Vehicles designed to transport 16 or more passengers, 
including the driver, and vehicles placarded for hazardous materials, that 
do not meet the criteria for Class A or B above fall under this classification 
and may drive all vehicles in Class D.
CDL Endorsements are required for double/triple trailers, tanker 
vehicles, passenger vehicles and vehicles placarded for hazardous materials.
ENDORSEMENTS
N – Tanks 1,000 gallons or greater
H – Hazardous materials
X – Tanks and Haz Mat
T – Double/triple trailers
P – Greater than 15 passengers including driver
S – School bus  
Commercial Drivers Manuals and information are available at your local 
driver license office.
VESSEL LICENSE
In 1994, the Alabama Boating Safety Reform Act was passed requiring 
operator certification for all operators of motorized watercraft. Persons 
ages 12 years old and older may obtain a vessel license.  
In 2001, The Boating Safety Enhancement Act was passed mandating 
anyone who turned 12 years old after January 1, 2002, may, after obtaining 
a vessel license, operate a vessel only if an adult 21 years old or older with 
a vessel license, is onboard and in a position to take immediate control of 
the  vessel. A licensed operator, 14 years old or older, may operate alone.
Persons born before April 28, 1954 are exempt from examination but 
are required to go to their driver license office to have vessel class issued. 
Vessel manuals are available at your local driver license office.  The same 
identification is required for first time applicants getting a vessel license 
if they do not already have an Alabama Driver License or Non-Driver 
Identification Card.
PRESENT YOUR LICENSE
In Alabama, a driver must have an appropriate driver license (or learner 
permit) in his or her possession while operating a motor vehicle and be 
prepared to present that driver license to any law enforcement officer upon 
his or her request.

C H A P T E R  2 
YOU MAY LOSE YOUR LICENSE
You are responsible for obeying all traffic laws. If you are arrested for violat-
ing the law and convicted, you may, in addition to the punishment handed 
down by the court, lose your driver license through cancellation, revocation, 
suspension, or disqualification. Any person whose driver license has been 
canceled, suspended, revoked, or disqualified must pay a reinstatement fee 
of not less than $100 in addition to meeting other requirements of state law 
before being relicensed. Failure to surrender your driver license within the 
time allowed as directed when canceled, revoked, or suspended, will result in 
an additional $50 fee. Reinstatement resulting from drug related convictions 
require an additional $25 fee.  Suspensions resulting from non-payment of 
child support require an additional $50 fee when reinstating the license.
CANCELLATION
The Director of ALEA is authorized to cancel any driver license upon deter-
mining that a person was not entitled to the license. Failing to give required or 
correct information on a driver license application or committing any fraud in 
making an application is also grounds for license cancellation.
REVOCATION
A driver license may be revoked if a driver is convicted of certain offenses. 
After the period of revocation has expired, the driver may apply for a new driver 
license and will be required to take and pass the complete examinations.
The Director must revoke your license upon receiving a record of your 
conviction for:
• Manslaughter or homicide resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle.
• Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the 
influence of intoxicating liquor upon a second or subsequent conviction.
• Driving a motor vehicle while a habitual user or under the influence of a con-
trolled substance to a degree rendering you incapable of safely driving a motor 
vehicle upon a second or subsequent conviction.
• Using a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony.
• Failures to stop, render aid, or identify yourself in the event of a motor vehicle 
accident resulting in the death or personal injury of another.
• Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statement under oath to the 
Director regarding driver license laws or under any other laws relating to the 
ownership or operation of motor vehicles.
• Three reckless driving convictions within 12 months.
• Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle belonging to another.
18 
C h a p t e r 2 / Y o u M ay L o s e Y o u r L i c e n s e 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
19
SUSPENSION
A driver license may be suspended if a driver is convicted of certain offenses 
or is judged incompetent to operate a motor vehicle. After the period of sus-
pension, the driver license will be reinstated unless it expired during the period 
of the suspension, or unless all the requirements of the suspension were not 
met.
Your driver license may be suspended if you:
• Have been convicted with such frequency of serious offenses against traffic 
regulations governing the movement of vehicles to indicate disrespect for 
traffic laws, and a disregard for the safety of other persons on the high-
ways.
• Are a habitually reckless or negligent driver of a motor vehicle as estab-
lished by a record of accidents or other evidence.
• Are incompetent to drive a motor vehicle.
• Have permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of your license or mutilated 
such license.
• Have committed an offense in another state which, if committed in this 
state, would be grounds for suspension or revocation.
• Are convicted of fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer.
• Are convicted of racing on the highways.
• Fail to answer a traffic court summons on time or fail to pay.
• Are ages 15 through 18 and withdraw from school under certain condi-
tions prior to graduation.
• Fail to maintain SR-22 insurance when required.
• Have non-payment of Child Support.
• Have medical reasons.
• Have 4 or more points accrued on driving record or 2 or more moving 
traffic violations on a GDL (Graduated Driver License).
• First Offense DUI or Drugs (Juvenile or Adult).
 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
19
SUSPENSION
A driver license may be suspended if a driver is convicted of certain oﬀenses 
or is judged incompetent to operate a motor vehicle. Afer the period of sus-
pension, the driver license will be reinstated unless it expired during the period 
of the suspension, or unless all the requirements of the suspension were not 
met.
Your driver license may be suspended if you:
• Have been convicted with such frequency of serious oﬀenses against traﬃc 
regulations governing the movement of vehicles to indicate disrespect for 
traﬃc laws, and a disregard for the safety of other persons on the high-
ways.
• Are a habitually reckless or negligent driver of a motor vehicle as estab-
lished by a record of accidents or other evidence.
• Are incompetent to drive a motor vehicle.
• Have permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of your license or mutilated 
such license.
• Have committed an oﬀense in another state which, if committed in this 
state, would be grounds for suspension or revocation.
• Are convicted of ﬂeeing or attempting to elude a police oﬃcer.
• Are convicted of racing on the highways.
• Fail to answer a traﬃc court summons on time or fail to pay.
• Are ages 15 through 18 and withdraw from school under certain condi-
tions prior to graduation.
• Fail to maintain SR-22 insurance when required.
• Have non-payment of child support.
• Have medical reasons.
• Have 4 or more points accrued on driving record or 2 or more moving 
traﬃc violations on a Graduated Driver License (GDL).
• First Oﬀense DUI or Drugs (Juvenile or Adult).
THE ALABAMA POINT SYSTEM
Alabama established a uniform system of suspending driver licenses on 
either or both of the grounds listed in §32-5A-195. Te following classiﬁcation 
of point values shall be assessed for the following enumerated oﬀenses 
against each driver, whether occuring in the State of Alabama or elsewhere:
 
• Any conviction that resulted from a charge that involved  
6 Points 
 
 the drinking of alcoholic beverages and the driving of a 
 
 motor vehicle but did not require mandatory revocation of
 
 the driver license

20 
C h a p t e r 2 / Y o u M ay L o s e Y o u r L i c e n s e 
• Reckless Driving or Reckless Endangerment 
6 Points
    involving operating a motor vehicle
• Failure to Yield Right of Way
5 Points
• Passing Stopped School Bus 
5 Points
• Wrong Side of Road/Illegal Passing 
4 Points 
• Following Too Closely 
3 Points
•
• Inability to Control Vehicle 
2 Points
• Improper Lane Violation 
2 Points
• Speeding Violation to Include 1-25 mph Over Speed Limit 
2 Points
• Speeding 26 mph or More Over Speed Limit 
5 Points
• Drinking alcohol While Operating a Vehicle 
2 Points
• Admin Per Se 
6 Points
• Improper Operation of Motorcycle 
2 Points
• Failure to Obey Construction/Maintenance Zone Markers/
3 Points
• Emergency Vehicle Violation 
2 Points
• Failure to Signal/Use Incorrect Turn Signal 
2 Points
• Making Improper Turn 
2 Points
• Coasting 
2 Points
• Unsafe Operation 
2 Points
schedule:
 
 12-14 Points in a 2-year period 
 60 days
 
 15-17 Points in a 2-year period 
 90 days
 
 18-20 Points in a 2-year period 
120 days
 
 21-23 Points in a 2-year period
180 days
 
 24 and above points in a 2-year period  
365 days
Upon receipt of notice of the suspension of his driver license, the driver may 
request a pre-suspension or administrative hearing in the county of his 
residence before an agent of the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency. 
purposes for a period of two years from the date of conviction but remain on a 
driver’s record.
when a suspension action is taken against your license. You are entitled to an 
license number. Please send written request to Driver License Services, PO Box 
1471 Montgomery Al 36102-1471 or request administrative hearing online 
www.alea.gov/driver license/submit hearing request.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
21
C H A P T E R  3
THE DRIVING TASK
Driving a motor vehicle is a serious responsibility, not only to you, but 
also to all others on the road. To be a good, safe driver you must know the 
rules and respect them, know and follow proper driving procedures, and 
have a good attitude. The proper attitude toward the laws and toward oth-
ers on the road is extremely important. Courtesy toward others should be 
practiced at all times.
GOOD DRIVING HABITS
It is just as easy to develop good driving habits as it is to fall into bad 
habits. Safety techniques begin the moment you step into the car. Start by 
forming good habits immediately and use them for EVERY trip, whether 
it’s for just a few blocks or for several hundred miles.
Entering the Car
Develop a routine for entering and leaving your car. Adjust the seat, mir-
rors, and check passengers to be sure they are properly seated and do not 
interfere with your driving. Before switching on the ignition, buckle your 
safety belt and see that all passengers do likewise.
If you are driving a hand-shift vehicle equipped with a manual transmis-
sion, push in the clutch before turning the ignition key. If you have an auto-
matic transmission, be sure the indicator is in park or neutral and depress 
the brake pedal as you turn the key.
POSTURE AND STEERING
Good posture at the steering wheel is important. It will result in better 
vision, control, and ability to maneuver in an emergency. You should sit 
erect, comfortably gripping the outside rim of the steering wheel with both 
hands. Don’t grip the wheel so tightly as to restrict reflexes but keep a firm 
grip to maintain control. Always keep both hands on the wheel except when 
it is necessary to remove one for signaling or for another purpose necessary 
to the operation of the vehicle.
STARTING FROM A PARKING PLACE
In preparing to leave a parallel parking spot, look over your shoulder as 
well as in rear view mirrors and wait until the way is clear before pulling 
into traffic. Indicate your intention by signaling. Enter traffic in the near-
est lane and remain in that lane until it is safe to change into another lane.
ON THE ROAD
You must drive within a single traffic lane without weaving from one lane to 
another or straddling the lane marking. You are in a traffic lane whenever driv-

22 
C h a p t e r 3 / T h e  D r i v i n g T a s k 
ing on any street or highway. A traffic lane is part of a street or highway wide 
enough to permit safe operation of a vehicle or line of vehicles. Often lanes are 
not marked, but they are there whether marked or not.
RULES FOR TURNS
These are some of the rules for making safe, courteous and legal turns:
• Prepare for the turn before you get there. Don’t make the decision to 
turn at the last moment. Observe and be alert.
• Get into the proper turn lane well ahead of the place where you will 
make your turn. Be sure it is safe to make the change.
• At least 100 feet before making the turn, signal your intentions. 
Continue the signal until you are ready to make the actual turn. Signals 
are given to inform both pedestrians and drivers of your intentions. 
Both hands should be on the steering wheel when actually turning. 
Pedestrians have the right of way over the motor vehicle.
• Reduce speed before making turns. 
• Always finish your turn in the proper lane.
• Make sure in advance that it is safe to turn. Check to the front, rear, 
and sides for cars and pedestrians, and also watch for situations devel-
oping in the street you will enter upon turning.
• Be certain your signals are discontinued after completing a maneuver.
• During the daytime, hand and arm signals may be used in addition to 
signal lights. Reflection of bright sunlight may make it difficult for 
other motorists to see your flashing signal light.
TURNING FROM FOUR-LANE HIGHWAYS
In making a right turn from a four-lane or divided highway, enter the 
right lane well in advance of the turn and make a tight turn into the right 
lane of the cross street.
For a left turn, move to the lane nearest the center line or traffic divider 
and turn from the inside lane. Avoid a wide swing during your turn. Enter 
the cross street just to the right of the centerline. Some intersections are 
marked to permit turns from more than one lane and you may make your 
turns as indicated by signs or pavement markings.
PROPER TURNING RULES
• Plan ahead.
• Be in the proper lane well before the turn (follow proper steps to 
change lanes).
• Signal the direction you plan to turn.
• Reduce your speed and check for persons and vehicles in your turning 
path.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
23
• Turn into the proper lane (see Turning Diagrams).
• Adjust speed to the flow of traffic.
  
Right turns from two-way  
Car "A" and Car "C"
Left turns from two-way  
Car "B" and Car "D" 
Turns from two-way to one-way 
Turns from one-way onto one-way       
Turns from one-way to two-way  
C
D
B
A

24 
C h a p t e r 3 / T h e  D r i v i n g T a s k 
THREE-POINT TURN
When making a three-point-turn, turning your vehicle around so that 
you are driving in the opposite direction from the direction that you were 
traveling, the three-point-turn must be made without endangering other 
traffic. They are normally permitted where your vehicle can be seen for a 
great distance and where traffic is such that making a three-point-turn would 
not constitute a hazard.  Three-point turns are not permitted on interstate 
freeways, on curves, or near the top of hills where you cannot be seen by 
drivers of other vehicles approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
Three-point turns are governed by local ordinances and there may be no signs 
to warn you. Prohibitory signs are usually posted at hazardous locations.
CURVES
Slow down before entering curves because of the danger of running over 
the center line or leaving the roadway. A driver should enter a curve slow 
enough to enable him to accelerate slightly when actually rounding the 
curve.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH bicycles
Traffic laws also apply to people on bicycles. That is, people on bicycles 
possess the same rights and responsibilities of the road as people in motor 
vehicles. Therefore, both drivers of motor vehicles and people on bicycles 
should be fully aware of all of the state’s traffic laws and obey them. The fol-
lowing are specific laws that apply to people on bicycles that everyone should 
know:
• Every person on a bicycle operating upon a roadway shall ride as close 
as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, except under the 
following situations:
o	 When passing another vehicle.
o	 When preparing for a left turn.
o	 When reasonably necessary to avoid road or traffic conditions such 
as debris, opening of car doors, pedestrians, etc.
• People on bicycles may ride two abreast at all times. 
• People on bicycles are required to ride with the flow of traffic and 
A
B
C

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
25
signal for all turns, lane changes, or stops by using the same hand and 
arm signals as motor vehicle drivers.
• Where a bicycle lane is available, people on bicycles must use it. A bicycle 
lane is defined as a portion of a roadway that has been designated by 
striping, signing, and pavement markings for preferential or exclusive 
use by people on bicycles. Neither sidewalks nor multipurpose paths 
qualify as designated bicycle lanes. In Alabama, it is illegal for people 
on bicycles to ride on the sidewalk. 
• People on bicycles who are under the age of 16 years are required 
to wear a securely fastened protective helmet when riding on public 
roadways, other public rights-of way, public bicycle paths and in public 
parks.
Since people on bicycles travel under their own power, it is important for 
motor vehicle operators to be especially aware of them to prevent collisions. 
Following are special situations motor vehicle drivers must be aware of:
• Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person 
operating a motor vehicle on such a roadway shall not drive in the 
bicycle lane except to park where parking is permitted, to enter or leave 
the highway, or to prepare for a turn.
• When turning across a bicycle lane, the driver shall drive the motor 
vehicle into the bicycle lane prior to making the turn and shall make 
the turn so long as such preparation for a turn shall not encroach upon 
the safety of the person on the bicycle in the lane.
• Be especially careful when passing people on bicycles. Make sure there 
is enough room between the side of your vehicle and the bicycle. 
Alabama state law requires that you pass a person on a bicycle with a 
distance of not less than three feet between your motor vehicle and 
the person on a bicycle. Be aware that when traveling at higher speeds, 
motor vehicles create strong wind currents which can batter a person 
on a bicycle, even resulting in an accident. Operators of motor vehicles 
need to be especially cautious and courteous when passing people on 
bicycles.
• Pass a person on a bicycle with the same caution and respect as you 
would another motor vehicle. Avoid passing when traveling uphill or 
in a curve, areas where visibility is limited or obstructed. Do not pass 
when there are other vehicles present in the lane into which you must 
travel in order to safely pass the person on the bicycle. If the road is 
narrow and you are unable to safely pass a person on a bicycle, do not 
follow too closely and do not blast the person on the bicycle with your 
horn. Remain behind the person on the bicycle at a safe interval until 
you are able to pass.
• Remember that a person on a bicycle is sometimes difficult to see amid 
other traffic. Be especially watchful at intersections, when crossing 

26 
C h a p t e r 3 / T h e  D r i v i n g T a s k 
sidewalks, or when entering or leaving alleys or driveways.
• During wet weather, the braking ability of a bicycle is greatly reduced. 
Motorists should be prepared to compensate for the person on a 
bicycle’s decreased ability to slow or stop.
• According to Alabama State Law, bicycles should be equipped with 
lights or reflectors for nighttime riding. However, the hours of 
darkness or poor visibility are potentially dangerous. Use extra caution 
during these hours. 
Please remember that in the event of a collision between a person driving a 
motor vehicle and a person riding a bicycle, the person on a bicycle is largely 
unprotected and a collision could very likely result in serious injury or even 
death for him or her. Therefore, as a person operating the motor vehicle – the 
more dangerous and maneuverable vehicle – you should practice added care, 
caution, and concern when encountering people on bicycles while driving. 
SHARING THE ROAD WITH MOTORCYCLES
The increasing popularity of motorcycle riding is evident by the variety 
of riders and two-wheeled motor vehicles appearing on our streets and high-
ways. Motorcycle accident statistics show that a substantial percentage of the 
accidents involve riders with limited experience.
Motorcyclists have the same rights and responsibilities on public roadways 
as other highway users. While legally everyone must abide by the same traffic 
laws, there are special situations and conditions drivers need to be aware of 
so they can share the road safely with those who choose to use two wheels 
instead of four.
Why is it so important to be aware of motorcycles and their operation?
Primarily because motorcycles are not easily identified in traffic. 
Motorcycles are only about two feet wide compared with the five-to-six-foot 
width of an automobile. Even when seen, it’s difficult for some drivers to 
judge how far away motorcyclists are.
Finally, even when seen and the distance away is correctly judged, some 
drivers can’t tell how fast motorcyclists are traveling. Being alert to this special 
perceptual problem and how motorcyclists react in specific situations can help 
to avoid colliding with motorcyclists in traffic. The following are a few of 
the specific situations that call for special attention by motorcyclists and the 
driver.
Left turns in front of an oncoming motorcyclist account for a large per-
centage of car/cycle injury producing accidents. The problem of not seeing 
the motorcyclist is two fold: car drivers may fail to pick the cyclist out of the 
traffic scene, or drivers may fail to judge the speed of the oncoming motor-
cycle. The correct behavior is to: 
LOOK AND LOOK AGAIN. MAKE SURE YOU KNOW THE 
SPEED OF THE MOTORCYCLE BEFORE MAKING A LEFT TURN.
Turn signals are not automatically self-canceling on most motorcycles. At 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
27
times, the rider may forget to turn the signal off.
Before making a turn in front of any vehicle, BE SURE THE VEHICLE 
IS TURNING and not continuing straight with a forgotten turn signal still 
blinking.
Following distance behind the motorcyclist should be the same 2-second 
following distance given any other vehicle. Following too closely may make 
the rider nervous, causing the rider’s attention to be distracted from the road 
and traffic ahead.
Lane usage for the motorcyclist is critical. Motorcycles are entitled to the 
same full lane width as all other vehicles. A skilled motorcycle operator is 
CONSTANTLY CHANGING positions within a lane to maximize being 
seen, to see the roadway better, and to compensate for objects on or near the 
road. Drivers should never move into the same lane alongside a motorcycle 
even if the lane is wide and cyclist is riding far to one side. It is not only illegal, 
but extremely hazardous.
Inclement weather and slippery surfaces can be real problems for motor-
cycles. Drivers should allow even more following distance for motorcyclists 
when it’s dark, raining, or the road surface is wet and slippery. Skilled 
motorcycle riders will slow down under these conditions. Remember that 
motorcycles only have two wheels compared to four for a car. Be alert to the 
problem of glare that rain and wet surfaces create, especially at night. It is easy 
to lose sight of a motorcycle and its rider under the best of circumstances. 
Rain, wind, dust, and smog affect the cyclist’s vision. The cyclist’s face shield, 
windshield, or goggles help but cannot completely overcome all the vision 
limitations under these conditions.
Cross winds can be hazardous to motorcyclists. Windy conditions can 
actually move a motorcycle out of its lane of travel. Areas to look out for are 
wide-open, long stretches of highways and bridges. Fast-moving, large trucks 
have been known to create windblasts, which can startle a motorcyclist, and 
under certain conditions, actually move the motorcyclist out of the path of 
travel. Drivers should be alert to these conditions to prepare themselves for 
the possible quick change in speed or direction of the motorcycle.
Road surfaces and things in the road that do not normally affect other 
vehicles can create problems for the cyclist. Gravel, debris, pavement seams, 
small animals, and even manhole covers may cause the motorcyclist to change 
speed or direction.
Railroad grade crossings may be rough or cross the road at an angle. The 
rider may slow down or change direction so the tracks can be crossed head on. 
The cyclist may rise off the seat to help cushion the shock of a rough crossing.
Metal or grated bridges create a wobbling sensation in the front tire of 
the motorcycle greater than the feeling experienced in a car. This wobbling 
sensation may cause the inexperienced motorcyclist to quickly change direc-
tion or slow down.
Grooved pavement, when first encountered by a motorcyclist, may create a 
similar wobbling sensation. To overcompensate for this feeling, the rider may 

28 
C h a p t e r 3 / T h e  D r i v i n g T a s k 
slow down or change lanes suddenly.
Regardless of who is legally at fault in car/cycle accidents, the motorcyclist 
usually is the loser. The driver’s general awareness of motorcycles in traffic, 
combined with special attention in the situations described above, can reduce 
motorcycle accidents, injuries, and fatalities.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH LARGE VEHICLES
When sharing the road with trucks, buses or other large vehicles, there are 
some special tips that are important to remember:
No-Zones are danger areas around trucks and buses where crashes are 
more likely to occur. Some of the No-Zones are blind spots where your car 
“disappears” from the view of the truck or bus driver.
 
No-Zones
Side No-Zones: Don’t hang out on either side of trucks or buses! 
They have large blind spots on both sides. If you can’t see the driver’s face in 
the side-view mirror, the driver can’t see you. If that driver needs to change 
lanes for any reason, you could be in big trouble. This is especially true if there 
is an accident situation and the driver must take evasive action. When passing a 
truck or bus, always try to pass on the left and do it as quickly as possible. Get 
your vehicle ahead of the vehicle you are passing so the driver can see you. Do 
not ride alongside a truck or bus.
Rear No-Zones: Avoid tailgating! Unlike cars, trucks and buses have 
huge no-zones directly behind them that may extend as far as 200 feet. The 
truck or bus driver can’t see your car and you can’t see what is occurring ahead 
of you. If the truck or bus driver brakes suddenly, you have no place to go. 
When following a large vehicle at night, always dim your headlights.  Bright 
lights will blind the driver when they reflect off the side mirrors of the bus 
or truck.
no zone
1
no zone
2
no zone
4
no zone
3

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
29
Front No-Zones: Pass safely! Don’t cut in too quickly after passing a 
large vehicle. Look for the entire front of the vehicle in your rear-view mir-
ror before pulling in front and don’t slow down. Truck and bus drivers need 
nearly two times more room to stop. A National Safety Council study of reac-
tion time and braking distance found that at speeds of 55 miles per hour, a 
passenger car needs 193 feet to stop safely and a loaded truck needs 430 feet.
Backing No-Zones: Pay closer attention! Never cross behind a truck or 
bus that is backing up. Hundreds of accidents occur each year because motor-
ists and pedestrians ignore a backing vehicle. Drivers of large vehicles cannot 
see directly behind them. They may not be able to see you.
Turning No-Zones: Avoid the “squeeze play”! Truck and bus drivers 
need to swing wide to the left to safely make a right turn. Watch the driver’s 
signal. When the right turn signal is blinking, do not attempt to pass on the 
right. The driver will not be able to see you and you will become trapped. 
It is best to wait until the truck or bus has completed the maneuver before 
proceeding.
PARKING
Any vehicle left standing along a rural highway for any reason must be 
moved off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway. If the vehicle 
cannot be moved, you must take lighting and marking precautions to elimi-
nate danger to other traffic.
PARKING ON A HILL
When parking on a hill you must make sure your car does not roll into traf-
fic if the brakes do not hold. Always set the hand brake. Shift to the PARK 
position if you have one. If not, shift to reverse or low gear. If you park where 
there is a curb:
Facing downhill, turn your wheels toward the curb and shift into reverse 
gear or PARK.
Facing uphill turn your wheels away from the curb and shift into low gear 
or PARK. If there are no curbs, turn your wheels toward the edge of the road, 
whether facing uphill or downhill.
A.	Downhill with or without a curb, turn wheels toward curb.
B.	Uphill with curb, turn wheels away from curb.
C.	Uphill without curb, turn wheels to the right.
A.
B.
C.
Downhill
Uphill
Uphill (no curb)

30 
C h a p t e r 3 / T h e  D r i v i n g T a s k 
Parking is NOT allowed at the following places:
• Within intersections.
• On a crosswalk or a sidewalk.
• Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an uncontrolled intersection.
• Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal 
located at the side of a roadway.
• Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
• Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
• In front of a driveway.
• Upon any bridge or in a tunnel.
• On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the curb or the edge of a 
highway.
• Beside a curb that is painted yellow, or where official signs prohibit 
­parking.
STEPS IN PARALLEL PARKING
A. Car 2 pulls even with car 1.
B. Car 2 maneuvers gently toward the space.
C. Car 2 turns wheels sharply.
D. Car 2 begins straightening wheels.
E.	Wheels on car should be turned parallel to the curb.
A.
B.
E.
D.
C.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
31
ALABAMA’S SAFETY BELT AND CHILD RESTRAINT LAWS
Alabama’s safety belt law requires that all front-seat occupants, regardless 
of age, be restrained.
Alabama’s child restraint law requires that children through age 15 must 
be restrained when riding in motor vehicles in Alabama. The law applies to 
occupants of front and back seats of passenger cars, pickup trucks, vans (with 
seating capacity of 10 or fewer), minivans and sport utility vehicles. Violators 
will have points assessed against their driver record, in addition to incurring 
a fine of $25.
The law requires the following size appropriate restraint systems:
 
Infant-only seat or convertible seat used in the rear-facing position 
until an infant is at least 1 year of age or 20 pounds.
 
Convertible seat in the forward position or forward-facing seat until 
a child is at least 5 years of age or 40 pounds.
 
Booster seat until a child is 6 years of age.
 
Seat belt until a child is 15 years of age.
WEARING SEAT BELTS IS THE MOST EFFECTIVE WAY TO REDUCE HEALTH
AND SERIOUS INJURIES IN TRAFFIC CRASHES

32 
C h a p t e r 4 / T h e D r i v e r 
C H A P T E R  4
THE DRIVER
Accident records show that over 90 percent of the highway crashes are 
caused by driver error, lack of knowledge, inattention, physical or mental 
condition, improper attitude or faulty judgment.
Any professional driver will tell you that it takes much more than basic 
skills to make a good driver. After learning and mastering the basics, a driver 
must continue to study the fine points of good driving and those physical and 
mental conditions that affect driving.
YOUR PERSONALITY AFFECTS YOUR DRIVING
If you are worried, distracted, or if your mind is preoccupied, you cannot 
count on being sufficiently alert to drive safely. Home troubles, quarrels, mis-
understandings, financial worries, serious illness in the family, personal fears, 
or over-confidence make you far more likely to have an accident. They can 
make you temporarily accident-prone. Strong emotions can work the same 
way. Persons who have just had violent arguments or who are angry or in 
grief, need some time for cooling off, or for making an adjustment before they 
drive. Taking it out behind the wheel on streets or highways is very poor judg-
ment and can prove an expensive way to expend emotions. Worry and safe 
driving do not mix. If worried, ill, nervous, frightened, angry, or depressed, 
let someone else drive.
As a well-adjusted person, you are more likely to make a good driver, partly 
because you are inclined to recognize that traffic situations require fair shar-
ing of the road.
You act, not merely from your personal point of view, but from the point 
of view of all street and highway users. You have developed social responsibil-
ity.
There is something about getting behind the wheel and in control of the 
power, speed, and bulk of a car that reveals the type of individual you are. You 
can soon see whether you are inclined to be a bully, a thoughtless lawbreaker, 
and a self-centered lane-stealer; or whether you are reliable, courteous, and 
sportsmanlike. Whether a younger or an older driver, if you are psychologi-
cally and emotionally mature, your driving reflects your readiness to share the 
road in the interest of traffic safety. Good driving attitudes and sound actions 
reflect mental and emotional maturity.
CONCENTRATION
Concentration is one of the most important elements of safe driving. The 
driver’s seat is no place for daydreaming, mental napping, window shopping, 
scenic viewing, or distracting conversation. Lack of concentration can dull 
a person’s powers of observation and cause an accident that could have been 
avoided. Driving an automobile is a full-time job. There have been too many 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
33
crashes, after which the driver who survived said, “I don’t know what hap-
pened.”
Cellular Phone Usage: When using your cellular phone while driving, 
always remember your number one responsibility is driving.  If you do use a 
cellular phone, take the following precautions:
• Always assess traffic conditions before calling.
• Be familiar with the telephone keypad – use speed dial, if possible.
• Place calls when stopped or have a passenger call.
• Ensure phone is within easy reach.
• Use speaker phone/hands-free device.
• Avoid intense, emotional or complicated conversations.
• Avoid talking on phone in congested traffic or bad weather.
• Pull off the road to dial or complete a conversation.
HIGHWAY HYPNOSIS AND FATIGUE
Stop driving when you feel drowsy. Don’t try to fight it. Pull off the high-
way at the first rest stop or service area. If you are getting tired, a cup of coffee 
and a bit of stretching may be enough to wake you. If you are really sleepy, get 
off the highway and take a nap. Drowsiness is one of the greatest dangers in 
interstate highway driving. Don’t rely on “stay-awake drugs”. They are likely 
to make your driving even more hazardous.
It is advisable to take regular rest stops - every 100 miles or every two 
hours. Get out of the car and walk around - stretch your legs and relax.
On long trips, it is a good idea to exercise your eyes. Expressway drivers 
are subject to “highway hypnosis”- a condition of drowsiness or unawareness 
brought on by monotony; the sound of the wind, the tires on the pavement, 
and the steady hum of the engine. Keep shifting your eyes from one area of 
the roadway to another and focus them on various objects - near and far, left 
and right. Reading the highway signs will help you to stay awake and drive 
safely.
MEDICAL ASPECTS OF DRIVING
Physical condition has an important bearing on a person’s driving ability. 
Alcohol, drugs, illness, or disability, are factors which may cause or contrib-
ute to traffic crashes.
DRINKING AND DRIVING
RELATIONSHIP OF ALCOHOL TO TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
Driving after drinking is a wide-spread practice. The consumption of 
alcohol by drivers is a major contributing factor in traffic crashes. Reliable 
research studies show that a blood alcohol concentration of .05 percent 
crashes, afer which the driver who survived said, “I don’t know what 
happened.”
CELLULAR PHONE USAGE
When using your cellular phone while driving, always remember your No. 1 
responsibility is driving.  If you do use a cellular phone, take the following 
precautions:  
Always assess traﬃc conditions before calling. • Be familiar with the telephone 
keypad – use speed dial, if possible. • Place calls when stopped or have a passen-
ger call. • Ensure phone is within easy reach. • Use speaker phone/hands-free 
device. • Avoid intense, emotional or complicated conversations. • Avoid 
talking on phone in congested traﬃc or bad weather. • Pull oﬀ the road to dial 
or complete a conversation.
TEXTING WHILE DRIVING
 
Alabama’s new law prohibits using a wireless device to write, send or read
a text message, instant message or e-mail while operating a motor vehicle.
 
The ﬁne for violating the law is $25 for a ﬁrst-time oﬀense, $50 for a 
second oﬀense and $75 for a third or subsequent oﬀense. Also, for each 
oﬀense, a two-point violation will be placed on the oﬀender’s driving record.
HIGHWAY HYPNOSIS AND FATIGUE
Stop driving when you feel drowsy. Don’t try to ﬁght it. Pull oﬀ the highway 
at the ﬁrst rest stop or service area. If you are getting tired, a cup of coﬀee and 
a bit of stretching may be enough to wake you. If you are really sleepy, get oﬀ 
the highway and take a nap. Drowsiness is one of the greatest dangers in 
interstate highway driving. Don’t rely on “stay-awake drugs.”  Tey are likely 
to make your driving even more hazardous.
 
It is advisable to take regular rest stops - every 100 miles or every two 
hours. Get out of the car and walk around to stretch your legs and relax.
 
On long trips, it is a good idea to exercise your eyes. Expressway drivers 
are subject to “highway hypnosis”- a condition of drowsiness or unawareness 
brought on by monotony: the sound of the wind, the tires on the pavement 
and the steady hum of the engine. Keep shifing your eyes from one area of 
the roadway to another and focus them on various objects - near and far, lef 
and right. Reading the highway signs also may help you to stay awake and 
drive safely.
MEDICAL ASPECTS OF DRIVING
 
Physical condition has an important bearing on a person’s driving ability. 
Alcohol, drugs, illness or disability are factors that may cause or contrib-
ute to traﬃc crashes.
DRINKING AND DRIVING
RELATIONSHIP OF ALCOHOL TO TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
 
Driving afer drinking is a widespread practice. Te consumption of 
alcohol by drivers is a major contributing factor in traﬃc crashes. Reliable 
research shows that a blood alcohol concentration of .05 percent 

34 
C h a p t e r 4 / T h e D r i v e r 
impairs the driving ability of most individuals to some degree. Greater 
impairment results as the blood alcohol concentration increases. At .08 per-
cent all individuals are definitely impaired. Under Alabama law, it is unlawful 
to drive with a concentration of .08 percent or more alcohol in the blood, 
or while under the influence of alcohol. Special studies show that FATAL 
accident involvement of drinking drivers is as high as 50 percent - a fact not 
recognized by people who drink and drive. The amount of alcohol in one 
bottle of beer is about equal to that in an average “shot of whiskey or a glass 
of wine.” The effect on the average driver is the same.
THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL
• Alcohol is a depressant, not a stimulant.
• Consuming alcohol causes drowsiness, blurred vision, and slowed 
r­eflexes.
• Consuming alcohol affects judgment and coordination.
• Impairment can occur before legal intoxication is attained.
• Alcohol related crashes have killed more people than all the U. S. soldiers 
killed in war. 
DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE
Each year, approximately 50 percent of all FATAL crashes involve drivers 
who have been drinking. Under state law, it is unlawful for any of the follow-
ing persons to operate or be in actual physical control of a vehicle:
• A person who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
• A person who is under the influence of a drug to a degree which renders 
him incapable of safely operating a motor vehicle.
• A person whose blood contains .08 percent or more concentration of 
alcohol.
• A person under the combined influence of alcohol and a drug to a degree 
which renders him incapable of safely driving
• Commercial vehicle operators whose blood alcohol content is .04% or 
more.
• Persons under 21 years of age whose blood alcohol content is .02% or 
more.
• School bus and daycare drivers whose blood alcohol content is .02% or 
more.
Penalty for a first conviction is a fine of $600 to $2,100, up to one year in 
jail or by both fine and imprisonment. In addition, the driver license will be 
suspended for 90 days. For a second conviction in five years the fine ranges from 
$1,100 to $5,100, a jail sentence of up to one year, or both fine and imprison-
ment. A mandatory 48 hours jail or 20 days community service and one-year 
revocation of driver license is required after a second conviction.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
35
For a third conviction, the fine ranges from $2,100 to $10,100, and the driv-
er license will be revoked for three years. In addition to the fine, the offender 
may be sentenced up to one year with a mandatory minimum sentence of 60 
days in jail, which may not be probated or suspended.
A fourth conviction or subsequent conviction is a Class C felony. Fines 
range from $4,100 to $10,100, with a five-year revocation of driver license. 
Additionally, the offender may be imprisoned for not less than one year and 
one day or more than 10 years.
IMPLIED CONSENT LAW
Any person who operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways of this 
state shall be deemed to have given his consent to a chemical test or tests of his 
blood, breath, or urine to determine blood alcohol content.
A driver under arrest for Driving Under the Influence, who refuses to sub-
mit to chemical breath tests when directed by an officer, shall have his driver 
license suspended.
There are several things you should remember about alcohol:
• Alcohol is a depressant, not a stimulant. It slows normal reflexes, interferes 
with judgment, reduces alertness, and impairs observation. If some people 
feel stimulated after drinking, it is simply that their inhibitions are low-
ered, causing loss of caution and self-control.
• It doesn’t matter whether you are drinking beer, wine, or whiskey - it’s the 
amount of alcohol which enters the blood that counts.
• Alcohol can affect you differently at different times. A small amount will 
affect you more on an empty stomach than it usually would if you have 
food in your stomach.
• While alcohol is absorbed rapidly into the system, it takes its time about 
leaving the body and the brain. Black coffee, food, or a cold shower might 
wake you, but they will not sober you. Once alcohol is in the blood stream, 
it must be broken down by the liver and oxidized; that is, turned into water 
and carbon dioxide and eliminated from the body through the kidneys and 
lungs. This process takes time.
 WHY NOT DRINK AND DRIVE ?
• Alcohol retards judgment.
• Alcohol slows down reflexes.
• Alcohol impairs vision.
• Alcohol causes loss in coordination.
• Alcohol destroys inhibitions.
• Alcohol promotes over-confidence.
• Alcohol prevents concentration.  

36 
C h a p t e r 4 / T h e D r i v e r 
DRUGS
There are many drugs, which interfere with a person’s ability to drive safely. 
These may be contained in prescriptions written by your doctor, or may be 
found in some of the remedies which you can buy without prescription. Here 
are a few things you should remember.
• When taking prescription medicine, it is important to ask your doctor 
about any possible side effects that relate to driving.
• Drugs, including some allergy remedies and cold pills that you can buy 
without prescription, may contain codeine, alcohol, antihistamines, or 
bromides. Each of these ingredients can affect your driving.
• Antihistamines are drugs used for relief of nasal congestion due to colds, 
to combat allergies, and for other purposes. They may cause side effects 
such as inattention, confusion, and drowsiness. Some are used as an aid to 
sleep.
• Barbiturates are sedatives used primarily for sleep. They include 
Phenobarbital, Sleep-Eze, and other preparations: Excessive use of these 
can produce symptoms similar to alcoholic intoxication - drowsiness, con-
fusion, and lack of coordination. A user may experience tremor of hands, 
lips, and tongue, and have difficulty in thinking or talking clearly. A person 
so affected is unfit to drive.
• The most dangerous types of drugs can be obtained only illegally. LSD 
and heroin are examples. They have the power to make users completely 
unaware of or indifferent to their surroundings. Anyone under the influ-
ence of such drugs must not try to operate a motor vehicle.
• Marijuana: Studies show that users of marijuana have more arrests for traf-
fic violations than other drivers. Many ignore traffic citations and continue 
to drive despite suspension or revocation of their driver licenses. Because 
little is actually known about the drug, many people feel that it is harmless, 
but experts agree that, for safety’s sake, it should not be used when driv-
ing.
• The drug-alcohol mix: Many times worse than alcohol or drugs used 
alone is the use of alcohol and drugs together. The use of these two drugs 
together produces serious effects on the mind and body and often death. 
According to some beliefs, if, for example, a “pop” pill gets you high, a 
drink with it will get you twice as high. WRONG! It doesn’t just double 
the effect; it multiplies and, when overdone, has caused death. If you are 
using drugs for medicinal purposes, don’t use alcohol at the same time.
CHRONIC ILLNESS OR IMPAIRMENT
In cases of chronic illness or physical impairment, the physician has the 
responsibility to inform his patient of any driving limitation that may be 
appropriate.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
37
HOW TO AVOID REAR END COLLISIONS
Most rear-end collisions are caused by following too closely. The space easi-
est to control is the space ahead of your vehicle. This space cushion is called 
“following distance.” You must consider the speed of the traffic, the condition 
of the highway and allow yourself enough following distance to stop if neces-
sary.
For years, the rule-of-thumb formula for following distance was one car 
length for every ten miles per hour. Recently, a new formula was introduced 
which is even more positive and easier to apply, the “two-second rule.”
The following chart illustrates why the two-second rule is more readily 
adaptable for today's drivers and allows for a safer following distance. 
To use the two-second rule, choose a fixed object on the road ahead (such 
as a sign post, tree, overpass, bridge abutment, etc.). When the vehicle ahead 
passes that object, begin to count “One thousand one, one thousand two.” If 
you reach the same object before you finish saying “one thousand two,” you are 
following too closely and should gradually slow down until you’ve reached the 
safe following distance.
The two-second rule applies to good and bad weather conditions. If the 
road and weather conditions are not good, increase your following distance to 
a four or five second count. The increased following limit also applies if you are 
driving vehicles with longer lengths than cars.
You must also watch for brake lights on the vehicle ahead and be alert for 
diminishing distances between your car and the one ahead. If you see brake 
lights or notice the following distance getting less, shift your foot to the brake 
pedal promptly so you are ready to stop if necessary.
STOPPING DISTANCE
The distance required to stop your car is important in determining a safe 
driving speed. The chart below may be used as a guide, but actual stopping 
distances depend upon many factors.
• Mental and physical reaction time of the driver.
• Type and condition of the pavement. There is a great difference between 
rough, dry concrete and slippery brick or smooth asphalt.

38 
C h a p t e r 4 / T h e D r i v e r 
• The type and condition of tires - radial, bias ply, regular tread, snow tires, 
the amount of tread - all determine the traction you will have for stop-
ping. The proper size tire for your vehicle is important; large, wide tires 
may help stop quicker on smooth, dry surfaces, but will skid or hydro-
plane easier on slippery or wet surfaces. Conversely, small narrow tires 
may “cut through” standing water but lose stopping power overall because 
of less rubber on the road and poorer traction. Consult your owner’s 
manual or with a car dealer for proper tire size for the vehicle you drive.
• Chassis design, weight distribution, suspension, and shock absorbers.
• Type of brakes, condition of brakes, and brake balance. In an emergency 
situation you can be in serious trouble if one or more of the brakes lock 
the wheels before the others fully take hold.
• Wind direction and velocity. Drivers may not realize the difference a 
strong tail wind can make when trying to stop suddenly at high speed.
WHAT TO DO IF YOU HAVE A CRASH
If you are involved in a traffic crash, you must stop at once and aid any 
injured persons. Call for medical assistance if necessary. Before the police 
arrive, use whatever means available to warn other traffic (flags, flares, etc).
It is dangerous to move injured persons. You should avoid moving the 
injured unless it is absolutely necessary to remove them from areas threatened 
by fire or other dangers common to a crash scene. Keep the injured lying or 
sitting down until competent medical aid arrives.
Apply first aid to the injured, making the persons as comfortable as pos-
sible. Treat for shock. Remember that a layman can give “too much first aid.” 
It is wise for every motorist to become familiar with first aid treatment by 
enrolling in Red Cross sponsored courses or other training courses offered by 
groups and organizations. You may not only save another person’s life with 
your knowledge, but it will also make you a more safety-conscious ­individual.
Remember - you must STOP whenever you are involved in a crash. Give 
your name, address, and registration number and show your driver license to 
other persons involved. This applies to any type of accident.
stopping distance: From eye to brain to foot to wheel to road
25
Mph
27ft 34.7ft 61.7ft
35
38ft
68ft
106ft
45
49ft
112.5ft
161.5ft
55
60ft
168ft
228ft
65
71ft
234.7ft
305.7ft
thinKing
DistAnCe
BrAKing
DistAnCe

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
39
REPORT ALL TRAFFIC MISHAPS
Any injury of fatal crash must, by the quickest means of communication, 
be reported to the local police if it occurs within a municipality or to the 
State Troopers if it happens on a state highway.
In case of injury, a fatality, or if damage to any vehicle or property in the 
crash amount to $500 or more, a written (Form SR-31) must be sent within 
30 days, by the driver involved if the “at fault’’ party was not insured at time 
of mishap. (If both parties were insured at time of accident then neither 
has to submit the SR-31 form). All correspondence should be mailed to: 
Alabama Law Enforcement Agency, Safety Responsibility Unit, P.O. Box 
1471, Montgomery, AL 36102-1471. SR-31 Forms are available at local law 
enforcement agencies, state trooper post, driver license services or on line.
WHEN INVOLVED IN A CRASH
Secure the names and addresses of persons involved and any witnesses.
Note other important relative factors. At the scene of the accident, driv-
ers involved should, if requested by any person who is also involved in the 
accident, give the name and address of the insurance company providing the 
automobile liability insurance coverage and the name of the local insurance 
agent. If unable to furnish such information at the scene of the accident, the 
driver should do so later.
If your vehicle hits an unattended vehicle, either notify the police, make an 
attempt to locate the owner of the parked vehicle, or leave a written notice in 
a conspicuous place on the unattended vehicle, giving your name and address. 
If a mishap damages any other type of property, notify the property owner.
Crash REPORTS HELP THE ALABAMA LAW ENFORCEMENT 
AGENCY AND HIGHWAY TRAFFIC OFFICIALS EVALUATE 
TRAFFIC CRASHES SO THEY CAN IMPROVE HIGHWAY AND 
TRAFFIC CONDITIONS.
IF YOU WITNESS A TRAFFIC MISHAP OR CRASH
When reporting a crash and requesting aid, be sure to give the exact 
location, if the road is blocked and the probable damage as well as injuries. 
Accuracy helps police respond quickly to the scene. In the best interest of 
traffic safety and enforcement, all crashes should be reported to the law 
enforcement agency that has jurisdiction.
RAILROAD CROSSINGS –ADVANCED WARNINGS
Railroad crossings are marked with one or more 
of the following devices:
•	The round railroad warning sign: It is yellow 
with a black X and the letters RR.  It means a 
highway railroad crossing is ahead and is placed 
750 feet before the track.
•	Pavement markings: In front of a railroad 
crossing, the pavement may be marked with a 
large X and two RR’s.  A yellow line in advance 
of the crossing means no passing.  White lines 

40 
C h a p t e r 4 / T h e D r i v e r 
on each side of the track show motorists where to stop when a train is 
approaching.
•	Flashing light signal: When lights begin to flash, you must always stop 
until it is safe to proceed.
•	Gates: When gates are being lowered the red flashing lights will warn you 
to stop. Remain stopped until the gates are raised and lights are no longer 
flashing.  If a railroad crossing has no warning device, slow down, look 
and listen for trains before proceeding.
•	Railroad Crossbuck: These signs are found at 
most crossings.  The driver should slow down and 
be prepared to stop upon sighting a train.  If there 
is more than one track, a sign below the crossbuck 
indicates the number of tracks.
Stopping for Railroad Crossings
The vehicles listed below are required to stop before 
crossing any railroad crossing:
• School bus, church bus, or any passenger bus.
• Trucks transporting flammables, explosives or other hazardous material.
When approaching a railroad crossing.  You must stop within 15 to 50 ft. 
The driver needs to slow down to allow himself enough time to be certain that 
he/she can stop when a train can first be seen.  Railroad crossings protected by 
electric or mechanical signal devices require the operator to bring his/her vehi-
cle to a complete stop.  If there is more than one track, make certain all tracks 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
41
are clear before crossing.  You must also stop if the crossing gate is lowered or 
when a train is approaching.
To avoid stalling, a driver should not change gears while crossing the track.
SAFETY TIPS FOR MOTORISTS
• Expect a train on any track at anytime. Be cautious both day and night.
• Never get trapped on a crossing. When traffic is heavy, wait until you are 
sure you can clear the crossing before proceeding.
• Watch out for the second train. When the last car of the train passes, 
do not proceed until you are sure no train is coming on another track, 
especially from the other direction.
• Never drive around gates. If the gates are down, stay in place and do not 
cross the tracks until they are raised. It is against the law to go around 
gates.
• Never race a train to the crossing. Even if you try-you lose.
• Never shift gears on the crossing. If your vehicle has a manual transmission, 
shift down and do not change gears while crossing the tracks.
• Watch for vehicles that must stop at crossings. Be prepared to stop when 
you are following buses or trucks that are required to stop. 
• Alabama ranks #13 in the nation for highway-railroad crossing fatalities.
• A motorist is 40 times more likely to die in a crash involving a train.
• More people in the United States die each year in highway-railroad 
crossing crashes than in all aviation crashes combined.
• Nearly 50% of vehicle/train collisions occur at crossings with active 
warning devices.
• Walking or playing on railroad tracks, trestles, yards and equipment is 
illegal. The penalty may be death.
• Cross tracks only at designated crossings.
• If your vehicle stalls on a crossing, get everyone out of the vehicle 
immediately and away from the tracks. Call your local law enforcement 
agency for assistance.
• Be aware that trains cannot stop quickly. A freight train travelling at 
55 mph takes a mile or more to stop. That’s the length of 18 football 
fields.
• ALWAYS EXPECT A TRAIN. 

42 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
C H A P T E R  5 
SIGNS, SIGNALS AND ROAD MARKINGS
A thorough knowledge of traffic signs, signals and road markings is a 
must for all drivers.  You must know them well enough to recognize them 
immediately and, in the case of regulatory signs, obey them without hesita-
tion.
Road signing has taken on a new look with greater use of symbols and 
pictures.  These have the advantage of quicker recognition at higher speeds 
and at greater distances.
In addition to becoming familiar with individual signs, it is important 
for the driver to recognize the shapes and colors of signs, because both are 
coded to the sign’s type of message.
TRAFFIC SIGNS 
The three types of traffic signs are classified according to function.  They 
are regulatory, warning, and information or guide signs.  KNOW THESE 
SIGNS BY THEIR SHAPES AND COLORS.
SCHOOL
WARNING
YIELD RIGHT
OF WAY
INFORMATIONAL
OR GUIDANCE
REGULATORY
WARNING
RAILROAD
WARNING
NO PASSING
ZONE
CONSTRUCTION
STOP
SLOW MOVING
VEHICLE

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
43
REGULATORY SIGNS
Regulatory signs regulate the movement of traffic.  They are black and 
white with the exception of those shown in actual color, and MUST be 
obeyed.
As you approach a 4-way stop intersection, 
look for other vehicles approaching at the 
same time. If there are other vehicles stopped 
or moving, the vehicles should  leave the stop 
signs in the same order in which they arrived. 
The first vehicle to arrive at a complete stop 
is the first vehicle allowed to leave the stop 
sign. When more than one vehicle arrives at 
the same time at the 4-way stop, the vehicle 
furthest to the right is allowed to leave first. 
Always allow at least a few seconds to make 
sure no one else begins to enter the intersec-
tion -- even if it’s your turn -- because many 
people do not follow the rule.    
	
The YIELD sign means slow down so you 
can yield the right of way to pedestrians 
crossing the roadway and to vehicles on the 
intersecting street or highway.   
White on red background.  Motorist is 
approaching one-way highway or ramp from 
wrong direction.   
This marks a one-way roadway with traffic 
coming against you.  You must not enter the 
one-way at this point.  
 Approach with caution and be sure that all 
tracks are clear before your cross.   
You must not make a left turn at this 
­intersection.  
STOP

44 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
 You may not park your car in this area even 
though you stay in the car.   
You must not park in a parking space des-
ignated for the physically handicapped on 
either private or public property unless:  (a) 
the vehicle being parked is operated by a 
physically handicapped person or under the 
direction of a physically handicapped person 
and (b) the vehicle visibly displays the handi-
capped sticker.   
Stopping permitted only for real emergencies. 
Traffic in left lane must turn left at the 
­intersection ahead.   
You must not turn either to the right or to the 
left at this intersection.   
Speed limit as posted under normal ­conditions.  
These are the “maximum” and “minimum” 
speeds permitted on this section of the ­highway. 
“Minimum” limits are usually posted on free-
ways and other controlled access highways.   
30 miles an hour is the top speed permitted in 
this area.   
eMergenCy
stopping
only
leFt lAne
Must
turn leFt
no
turns
SPEED
LIMIT
55
MINIMUM
45
SPEED
LIMIT
30
SPEED
LIMIT
70
reserVeD
pArKing
hAnDiCAp
plAte or perMit
only

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
45
 
Speed limit in school zone during hours indi-
cated.  School zone speed limit may also be 
displayed on lighted sign with flashing amber 
lights.   
Marks the beginning of a no passing zone. 
 At intersections controlled by traffic signals, 
you MAY NOT make a right or left turn on red 
if this sign is posted.   
You must not drive to the left of this sign.  
At the intersection ahead, traffic in right lane 
must turn right and traffic in adjoining lane 
may turn right or continue straight ahead.  
Double right turns are only permitted at inter-
sections that are properly signed.  At intersec-
tions that aren’t signed, follow the rules for 
right turns.   
You may travel only in the direction indicated 
by arrow.   
DIVIDED HIGHWAY  
WARNING SIGNS
Warning signs are black and yellow, except those used in construction areas 
which are black and orange.  These signs are used to warn you of hazardous 
conditions ahead requiring you to drive with extra caution.  Fluorescent yellow 
indicates pedestrian crossings and school zones.  Warning signs are usually dia-
mond shaped, but there are some exceptions.
DO
NOT
PASS
no
turn
on reD
DiViDeD
highwAy
only

46 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
 Sharp turn to the left.   
Curve to the right.   
Gradual curve to the right then curve to the 
left.
Winding road ahead.
Side road enters highway ahead from the right.
Side road enters highway ahead at an angle.
There is a bump ahead. Slow down!
You cannot go straight ahead. You must turn 
either to the right or left.
The side of the road is soft.  Do not drive off 
the pavement.
BuMp
soFt
shoulDer

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
47
The road ahead is not as wide as the road you 
are on.
Island ahead.  You may drive on either side.
There is a dip in the roadway.  Slow Down!
Sharp turn to the left then sharp turn to the 
right.
You cannot go straight ahead.  Road turns to 
both right and left.
There is not room on the bridge ahead to meet 
or pass another car or truck.
There is a STOP sign ahead.
There is a YIELD sign ahead.
The pavement ahead is not as wide as the pave-
ment on which you are driving.
roAD
nArrows
Dip
one lAne
BriDge
stop
AheAD
yielD
AheAD
pAVeMent
nArrows

48 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
This advises you of the top safe speed at which 
you can make the turn.
Warns of sharp turn or curve in direction of 
arrow.  Signs normally placed in series.
Railroad crossing ahead.  You must slow down, 
look carefully in both directions and be pre-
pared to stop.  Remember, a train cannot stop 
quickly!
Road shoulder much lower than road surface.
Truck Crossing.  Watch for trucks entering 
highway.
Fire Station.  Watch for fire trucks entering 
street or highway.
The road surface ahead will change to gravel or 
dirt.  Be prepared for this change.
The street has no outlet.
Number of highway lanes change ahead.  The 
three signs appear in a series as a repeating 
reminder to merge into the adjacent lane.
pAVeMent
enDs
DeAD
enD
lAne enDs
Merge
leFt
right
lAne
enDs

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
49
This sign is placed on the left side of a two-
lane road to warn of the beginning of a NO 
PASSING ZONE.
There is a traffic signal ahead.
Vehicles or loads higher than the clearance 
shown cannot go under the structure ahead.
You are leaving a separated one-way roadway 
and entering a two-way roadway.  Also used to 
remind drivers they are on a two-way road.
You will be merging with other traffic travel-
ing in the same direction.  Drivers entering 
from the right must yield to traffic on the main 
route, and must make use of speed-change lanes 
to merge smoothly and safely with the main 
traffic flow.
Another road crosses the highway ahead.
Divided highway ahead.
Divided highway ends.
The road ahead goes downhill.
n o
pA s s i n g
z o n e
13'- 6"

50 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
Slippery when wet.
Narrow bridge ahead.
Cattle crossing.
Watch for deer crossing the road.
*You must yield to pedestrians in the crosswalk. 
Just ahead is a location where people on 
foot often cross.  The crosswalk may not 
necessarily be at an intersection.  Use caution 
as you approach and drive more slowly and 
carefully, watching both sides of the street for 
pedestrians.
*School crossing.  Slow down and watch for 
children crossing.
*School bus stop ahead.
*Bike crossing.
*You may see the previous and current colors of these Bicycle, Pedestrian and School 
Crossing signs.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
51
3 foot minimum clearance required when 
passing.
Cyclist may use full lane if travel lane is narrow.
Shared Lane Markings (Sharrow) inform road 
users that people on bicycles might occupy the 
travel lane.
You are about to enter a road construction area. 
Be on the look-out for flagman, one-way traffic, 
other signs or obstructions.  Proceed with cau-
tion and obey signs and instructions.
Flagman ahead.
Workers in or near roadway.
Mowing equipment ahead.   
Flashing arrow panels:
Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels may 
be used in work zones both day and night to 
guide drivers into certain traffic lanes and to 
inform them that part of the road or street 
ahead is closed.  
roAD
ConstruCtion
1500 Ft
Mowers
AheAD
112 inches
72 inches
40 inches

52 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
Roundabout: A roundabout is a circular inter-
section that usually does not include a traffic 
signal and flows in a counter-clockwise direc-
tion around a central island.  Motorists must 
enter from the right -- yielding to traffic already 
in the roundabout -- and follow the circle to 
the right until the desired roadway is reached.
INFORMATIONAL OR GUIDE SIGNS
Guide or informational signs inform and direct motorists, and are green 
and white for motorist directions; blue and white for services; and brown and 
white for points of public recreational or cultural interest.  The highway route 
markers shown here are actual color.
Hospital
Gas - Food - Lodging
County Route
Recreational – Cultural Marker
Informational or Guidance
Interstate Routes
SELMA
MOBILE
DOTHAN
DESOTO STATE
        PARK

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
53
U. S. Routes
State Routes
MILEPOSTS 
To assist drivers in pinpointing locations and 
to provide a means for identifying the location 
of emergency incidents, and to aid in high-
way maintenance and servicing, mileposts are 
erected along most sections of the state’s main 
highways.  Zero mileage should begin at the 
south and west state lines or at junctions where 
routes begin.  
PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Generally, there are four types of pavement markings: centerline strip-
ing, edge striping, crosswalks, and pavement messages.
Centerlines:  The centerline is the painted stripe in the center of the 
road, which separates traffic proceeding in opposite directions.  Under the 
new Uniform Code, centerlines are to be painted yellow on two lane high-
ways and white on multi-lane highways and one way streets.  Broken lines 
are used in areas where there are no restrictions on passing when safe to do 
so.  In those areas where passing is not allowed, a solid yellow line is painted 
alongside the broken line.  If the solid yellow line is on your side of the 
centerline, you may not pass.  If passing is not allowed for traffic in both 
directions, the broken line will be replaced by two solid yellow lines.
Lane dividers:  When a roadway consists of two or more traffic lanes 
for vehicles moving in one direction, the lanes are divided by broken white 
lines.  These broken lines may be crossed when passing.
Edge striping:  In many areas, the right and/or left edges of the highway 
are marked with a solid white line.  This line indicates the outside edge of 
the traffic lane, and may be crossed only by traffic moving to or from the 
shoulder.  Occasionally yellow lines are used for left edgelines on divided 
roadways where traffic cannot pull entirely off the roadway, for marking of 
obstructions and islands, which must be passed on the right.
White solid line:  A normal solid white line is used to delineate the 
edge of a travel lane where travel in the same direction is permitted on both 
sides of the line but crossing the line is discouraged.  A wide solid line is 
MILE
1
2
3

54 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 
used for emphasis where crossing requires unusual care.
Double solid white lines:  A double solid white line is used to delineate 
a travel lane where travel is the same direction and is permitted on both 
sides of the line, but crossing the double lines is prohibited.
Crosswalks: White solid lines are used to denote pedestrian crosswalks 
at intersections and, in some situations, between intersections.  A driver 
must stop at all crosswalks which are occupied by pedestrians if there are 
no controlling signals.
Pavement messages: In some areas, pavement messages are used to warn 
of conditions ahead, such as SCHOOL ZONE, RR CROSSING, etc. 
Such messages are lettered on the road surface in white paint.
 Two-lane, two-way roadway, passing permitted.
Two-lane, two-way roadway, passing prohibited 
one direction
Two-lane, two-way roadway, passing prohibited 
both directions, crossing center-line permitted only 
as part of left turn maneuver.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
55
Multi-lane, two-way roadway, crossing center-line 
permitted only as part of left turn maneuver.
Multi-lane, two-way roadway, with two way left 
turn lane reserved exclusively for left turning vehi-
cles in either direction.
Divided roadways, multi-lane with divider (non-
traversable) and with no clearance for vehicle inner 
edge of the through lane.   
TRAFFIC SIGNALS
RED…Stop when signal is steady circular red. 
Remain stopped until signal turns to green. 
Right turn, and in certain instances, left turn 
movements after stopping are permitted.
YELLOW…A circular steady yellow means clear 
the intersection.  It follows a green signal.  You 
must not enter the intersection when the red 
signal comes on.
GREEN…Go when signal is steady circular 
green.  You may go straight or turn right or left, 
yielding to other vehicles and pedestrians lawful-
ly within the intersection.  A sign may prohibit 
a turn or turns.

Red Flashing light signals are used with cross-
buck signs at many railroad crossings.  Always 
stop when the lights begin to flash because a 
train is near.  Do not proceed until you can do so 
safely.  If there is more than one track, make 	
sure all tracks are clear before crossing.
Gates are used with flashing light signals at 
certain crossings.  Stop when the lights begin 
to flash before the gates lower across your side 
of the road.  Remain stopped until the gates are 
raised and the lights stop flashing.  
ARROWS ARE USED TO CONTROL  
SPECIFIC TURNING MOVEMENTS.
VEHICLE TURNS
The yellow and green arrow indications give 
the same control to the left turns as the stan-
dard traffic light gives to the through move-
ment.  
GREEN ARROWS permit you to proceed 
in the direction of the arrow while opposing 
traffic must stop.
GREEN ARROW…A steady green arrow 
shown alone or with any other indication 
means you may enter the intersection to make 
the movement indicated by the arrow or any 
other movement permitted by the other indi-
cations, yielding to pedestrians and vehicles 
lawfully using the intersection.  
YELLOW ARROWS come after green arrows 
to indicate that the protected movement indi-
cated by the green arrow is being terminated.
A steady YELLOW ARROW displayed with 
a circular green means that the previous pro-
tected green arrow movement is ending.
56 
C h a p t e r 5 / S i g n s, S i g n a l s a n d R o a d M a r k i n g s 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
57
A steady YELLOW ARROW displayed alone 
or with a steady circular red is used to clear 
the previous protected green arrow move-
ment.  You may not enter the intersection 
after the yellow arrow goes out.  
LANE USE CONTROL SIGNALS
Lane use control signals may be placed over individual lanes of a street, 
highway or freeway to indicate to drivers which lane(s) they may or may 
not drive in.
“STEADY RED X”… A driver facing this indi-
cation shall not drive in the lane over which the 
signal is located, and this indication shall mod-
ify accordingly all other traffic controls present. 
The driver shall obey all other traffic controls 
and follow normal safe driving practices.  May 
also be indicated by red light.
“STEADY GREEN ARROW”…A driver fac-
ing this indication is permitted to drive in the 
lane over which the arrow signal is located. 
The driver shall obey all other traffic controls 
and follow normal safe driving practices.  May 
also be indicated by green light.
“STEADY YELLOW X” – A driver facing 
this indication  is permitted to drive in the 
lane over which the “X” signal is located using 
caution.  Potentially hazardous conditions 
exist when the steady yellow “X” is displayed. 
May also be indicated by a yellow light.  
These images are from the Manual of Traffic Signs, by Richard C. Moeur 
(http://members.aol.com/rcmoeur/)

58 
C h a p t e r 6 / T r a f f i c L aw s 
C H A P T E R  6
TRAFFIC LAWS
Laws regulating the movement of traffic are an absolute necessity. 
Without traffic laws, all movements of vehicles on public roads would 
come to a complete stop in a very short time. Traffic laws apply to all who 
use the streets and roads - drivers of vehicles, operators of motorcycles and 
bicycles, and pedestrians. Traffic laws exist for your own protection. If you 
disobey them, you run the risk of killing or injuring yourself or someone 
else.
From time to time, traffic laws are changed or modified by our State 
Legislature. Any important changes will be brought to the attention of 
drivers through the news media, driver education courses, law enforcement 
officers, and all other resources. Every driver should study the manual every 
few years to know the laws of the state.
Listed here are the principle traffic laws as they apply to users of public 
streets and highways. Topics covered in other sections of this manual may 
be regulated by law, in addition to their value as safe operating suggestions 
for highway users.
SPEED REGULATIONS
Speed may not always, in itself, be the primary cause of traffic crashes, 
but it all too often is the factor that turns a minor mishap into a fatal acci-
dent. The greatest danger of excessive speed lies in the increased severity 
rather than the frequency of collisions.
Alabama’s basic speed law provides that you must never drive a vehicle at 
a speed that is faster than reasonable under existing conditions.
Consider road, weather, and your vehicle condition, as well as your own 
physical condition. What might be a reasonable speed at one time may not 
be reasonable at another time because of conditions.
SPEED LIMITS
In addition to the basic speed law, the traffic laws set up speed limits for 
normal driving conditions. Speeds in excess of such limits are prima facie 
evidence that they are unlawful, and you may be arrested. All speed limits 
in municipalities are maximum speeds.
Statutory limits apply unless there have been other speed zones estab-
lished and the limits are posted on official regulatory signs.
Statutory speed limits include:  
30 	
miles per hour in an urban district  
35 	
miles per hour unpaved road  

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
59
45 	
miles per hour county paved road (unless posted)  
55 	
miles per hour in other locations  
65 	
miles per hour where posted  
70 	
miles per hour where posted on interstate  
Minimum speed limits may also be set on some roadways. Where they 
are posted, any speed below that minimum is considered to be unlawful 
under normal weather, road, and traffic conditions. You must never drive so 
slowly that you will interfere with other cars or vehicles moving at normal 
safe speeds. Many accidents are caused by drivers who block or hinder other 
traffic by driving at speeds that are too low.
SLOW SPEEDS OFTEN REQUIRED
Slower speeds are necessary when you approach or cross a street, high-
way, or railroad crossing and also when approaching flags, flares, or fuses on 
roads. Slow down when approaching crests of hills and curves.
STOPPING
A complete stop is required for the following:
• At a STOP sign. When a stop sign is placed at the entrance to any 
street or highway, you must bring your vehicle to a complete stop. A 
vehicle approaching a STOP sign must stop at the marked stop line. If 
no stop line is marked, the vehicle must stop before entering the cross-
walk on the near side of the intersection. If there is no crosswalk, the 
vehicle must stop before entering the crossing street at the point near-
est the intersection where the driver has a clear view of approaching 
traffic. Proceed cautiously. You may have to stop a second time if your 
view was blocked at the first stop and there is conflicting traffic.
• When coming from an alley, private driveway, or building within a 
business or residence district. Always stop before crossing the sidewalk 
or crosswalk area.
• When a school patrol member is displaying an official flag in a STOP 
position.
• At an intersection or crosswalk when traffic signal shows a red light or 
stop signal. Wait until the signal changes to green and the way is clear 
before proceeding. You may make a right turn after stopping for a red 
light if you are in the proper lane for such turn. You may make a left 
turn after stopping if you are driving on a one-way street and the street 
you turn left onto is a one-way street with traffic moving from right 
to left. In the case of both right and left turns after stopping for a red 
light, you must yield to other traffic and pedestrians lawfully proceed-
ing through the intersection. Such turns cannot be made against a red 
light if a sign has been posted prohibiting such turn. If the traffic light is

60 
C h a p t e r 6 / T r a f f i c L aw s 
Coming from either direction you must stop 
when you see these signals displayed. 
 stop at least 20 feet from the bus.
flashing amber lights are a pre-warning that the 
bus is preparing to stop to load or unload children. 
In rural areas, the light are used at least 300 feet 
before stopping and in municipalities at least 100 ft.
Flashing red lights and extended stop area means 
that the bus is stopped to either load or unload 
school children.
STOP
STOP
Hazard warning lights
inoperative, treat the intersection as you would a four-way stop.
• At railroad crossing where STOP signs are posted.
• At a flashing red signal. This means the same as a STOP sign.
• When directed by a flagman or any traffic control device at railroad cross-
ings.
• At bridges opening for water navigation.
• When ordered to stop by a flagman at a construction site, or at any time 
when directed by a police officer.
• After being involved in an accident, proceed only after complying with 
procedure defined by law.
• When an emergency vehicle is coming toward you or approaches from 
behind, displaying flashing red or blue lights and activating a siren, you 
must pull over to the curb or side of the road and come to a complete stop.
• At a yield sign if there are pedestrians or vehicles crossing the intersecting 
street or highway.
• When you are following or meeting a school bus or church bus stopped 
on the road while the stop signal arm is extended and displaying flashing 
red lights. Remain stopped until the stop signal is retracted and red lights 
are turned off. You should also stop when meeting or following a school 
or church bus which is stopped on a four to six lane undivided highway. A 
stop is not required on a divided highway having four or more lanes which 
permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions when 
meeting a school or church bus which is stopped in the opposing roadway 
or if the school or church bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part 
of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to 
cross the roadway.
SCHOOL BUSES
Many school buses activate amber flashing lights well in advance of 
the stop to warn other drivers. 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
61
Watch For Stopped School Buses
                
RIGHT OF WAY AND YIELDING
Right of way rules are an aid to safe and smooth traffic flow. They 
emphasize courtesy and common sense. The violation of these rules is one 
of the main causes of traffic crashes. It’s smart driving to obey right-of-way 
rules.
The right-of-way rules include:
• If two vehicles enter an intersection not controlled by signs or signals, 
and from different roadways at about the same time, the driver of the 
vehicle on the left shall yield to the vehicle on the right. If you enter an 
uncontrolled intersection at an unlawful speed, you lose any right of 
way which you might otherwise have.
• Yield to emergency vehicles (such as ambulances, fire fighting appara-
tus, and police vehicles) when they are displaying a flashing red or blue 
light and sounding a siren or bell. Whether the emergency vehicle is 
overtaking or meeting you, pull to the side of the roadway and stop. In 
an intersection, clear it before stopping. Don’t proceed until the emer-
gency vehicle has passed.
• The law requires you to stop and give right of way at any intersection 
to a blind person carrying a white cane tipped with red and holding the 
cane with arm extended, or using a guide dog.
• Cars entering from a private road or driveway must stop and yield to 
cars on a public street or highway.
SCHOOL BUS
STOP
STOP
SCHOOL BUS
STOP

62 
C h a p t e r 6 / T r a f f i c L aw s 
• When entering an intersection where there is a yield sign facing you, 
slow down and, if necessary, stop to yield the right of way to vehicles and 
pedestrians legally crossing the roadway on which you are driving.
• When making a left turn within an intersection or into an alley, driveway, 
or private road, you must yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching 
from the opposite direction when it is within the intersection or so close 
as to constitute an immediate hazard.
• Vehicles entering an intersection on “green arrows” must yield to other 
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
NO PASSING ZONES
Many highway deaths and serious injuries occur on two-lane highways 
when vehicles collide head-on or sideswipe each other. Most of these are caused 
by improper or careless passing, and is almost always a violation of state law. 
Most two-lane highways in the state are adequately marked with solid yellow 
center stripes and prohibiting signs in areas where passing would be hazardous. 
In addition to those areas so marked, drivers must exercise extreme caution in 
all areas during the hours of darkness, poor visibility, and when road surfaces 
are slippery from rain, snow, or ice.
No Passing Zones
CENTER
LINE
NO PASSING
LINE
CENTER
LINE
NO PASSING
LINE
1
2

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
63
On two-lane roads with traffic moving in both directions, you may pass 
traffic on the left if the pass can be completed safely without exceeding the 
speed limit. In preparing to pass, check the road ahead for sufficient distance 
and the road behind for other traffic that maybe preparing to pass you. Signal 
your intention to the driver ahead - a tap of the horn or a flick of headlights at 
night is helpful. Activate left turn signals before passing, and right turn signals 
after passing and before returning to the right lane. Do not return to the right 
lane too soon - not until you can see the entire front of the vehicle you have just 
passed in your interior rear view mirror. When another car is trying to pass you, 
stay in your own lane and don’t increase speed.
Passing on the right is permissible on one-way roadways and streets and 
highways marked for two or more lanes of traffic moving in the same direction. 
It is unlawful to drive on the shoulder to pass except during an emergency or 
when so directed by traffic authorities. When passing on the right, be sure to 
check traffic ahead and behind and use signals to show your intention. Use of 
the signal alone does not give you the right to pass. Be extremely cautious in 
passing on the right and watch the car you are passing carefully. In some states, 
this is a forbidden maneuver and out-of-state drivers may not expect it.
You may not cross the center line to pass:
• On a curve or hill where you cannot see a clear passing distance of at least 
500 feet.
• At a highway intersection.
• When meeting an oncoming vehicle.
• Where signs prohibit passing, or where there is a solid yellow line on your 
side of the center line. Double solid yellow prohibits traffic from both 
directions from crossing the center line to pass.
PEDESTRIANS
When automobiles became popular as a means of traveling from one place 
to another, a problem arose as pedestrians and motor vehicles had to share the 
same roadways. There have been numbers of pedestrians killed or injured in 
collisions with vehicles. These numbers could be greatly reduced if motorists 
were more observant of pedestrian rights.
Be especially alert for pedestrians:
• On streets on which cars are parked.
• During the hours of darkness or poor visibility.
• At places where people cross - near mailboxes, institutions, churches, play 
areas, bus stops, etc.
• During morning and afternoon when children are going to and from 
school or at play.
• Be especially alert for older people who move slowly and cannot see or hear 
well.

64 
C h a p t e r 6 / T r a f f i c L aw s 
At sometime or another, every driver is a pedestrian and the traffic laws are 
written for both driver and pedestrian.
DRIVERS MUST:
• Yield the right of way to pedestrians.
• Not pass (overtake) another vehicle stopped for pedestrians in a crosswalk.
• Stop for school children and school safety patrols directing the movement 
of children.
• Yield to blind pedestrians carrying a white or metallic cane, with or 
without a red tip, or using a guide dog when such blind person enters an 
intersection of any street, alley or other public highway.
• Not block crosswalks when at a stop sign or waiting on a red light.
• Stop for a school bus displaying an extended stop arm.
• Exercise extreme care to avoid hitting a pedestrian.
PEDESTRIANS MUST:
• Obey traffic control signals at intersections.
• Use sidewalks where provided and usable.
• Walk on the left side of the roadway giving way to oncoming traffic.
• Yield to all vehicles when crossing at points other than within a marked 
crosswalk or in a crosswalk (extension of the sidewalk) at an intersection.
• Not stand in the roadway while hitchhiking.
SAFETY RULES FOR PEDESTRIANS
• When walking on a roadway, stay as near to the left side as possible and in 
single file.
• During the hours of darkness or poor visibility, carry a light or wear cloth-
ing trimmed with reflective materials. Since all clothing is not trimmed 
with reflective materials, it is a good rule always to wear light-colored 
clothing.
• Through vehicles are required to yield to you in intersections and cross 
­safely.
• Be aware of a driver’s difficulty in stopping quickly when streets are slip-
pery and when visibility is poor.
• Be sure that the driver sees you. Be sure you’ve made eye contact before you 
proceed.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
65
FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Only vehicles on necessary official business are permitted to follow within 
500 feet of emergency vehicles on an emergency run. Don’t drive over an 
unprotected fire hose unless authorized to do so by a police officer or fire 
department official.
OTHER TRAFFIC LAWS
Backing is a dangerous maneuver and accounts for many crashes among all 
classes of drivers.
If you are going to back the vehicle, it is a good practice to walk completely 
around the vehicle to be sure no person or obstacle is behind it.
Before backing, you should look to the front, sides, and rear and continue 
to look over your right shoulder to the rear while backing. Do not depend on 
your mirror. Back slowly into the proper traffic lane with a minimum of move-
ment. Follow the same rules when backing into traffic lanes after being parked 
at an angle.
Backing is prohibited on controlled access highways (freeways and express-
ways) except for emergency vehicles in performance of their duties. Except for 
backing into a parking place, it is never advisable to back on a public street or 
road. If you back out of a driveway, always back into the nearest lane and pro-
ceed from there. Never back across other traffic lanes.
Driving on shoulders is unlawful unless required by emergency conditions. 
It is never lawful, except under emergency conditions, to drive on the shoulder 
to pass another vehicle.
Obstructions on windows are prohibited by state law. No sign, poster, or 
other materials may be placed on any window of a vehicle if it obstructs a 
driver’s clear view of the highway.
CHANGING LANES
Never move from one lane to another until you make certain that you can do 
so safely. This means watching for safe clearance to the side, ahead and behind 
your vehicle. Do not rely solely on your mirror when checking for clearance. 
Glance over your shoulder to check the “blind spot” your mirror does not 
cover. You should show your intentions to other drivers by using turn signals 
or hand signals, but remember that a signal does not grant the right to change 
lanes. Whether you are changing to the next lane or, as may be necessary on 
multiple lane roadways, to some other lane, you must wait until it is safe to do 
so.
Be sure your intentions are known. Signals should be continued until you 
are ready to make the actual turn.
The correct hand signals are:
• STOP OR DECREASE SPEED…..hand and arm extended downward.
• LEFT TURN ......hand and arm extended out.
• RIGHT TURN......hand and arm extended upward.

Improper turns are the cause of many traffic accidents. The pedestrian is 
often the victim of an improper turn at an intersection. A wrong turn on the 
highway where the pace is faster may result in tragedy. Make an extreme effort 
to learn and abide by correct procedures of turning.
THROWING DEBRIS ON STREETS, HIGHWAYS
It is unlawful to throw or leave any bottles, nails, tacks, wires, cans, or any 
injurious items on any highway or to throw or drop objects at or upon a motor 
vehicle on the road.
LOADS MUST CONFORM TO LAW
It is unlawful to drive any vehicle so loaded or when there are such numbers 
of persons in excess of three in the front seat as to obstruct the driver’s view to 
the front and sides or hinder the driver’s control over his vehicle.
A load must not extend more than 5 feet beyond both the front and rear, 
inclusive, of the vehicle. If a load projects 4 feet or more from the rear of a vehi-
cle, a red flag at least 12 inches square must be attached at its end in daytime 
and a red light, visible for at least 200 feet, must be attached to the end at night. 
On passenger vehicles, a load may not extend beyond the line of the tandem.
DOCUMENTS REQUIRED AT TRAFFIC STOPS
When stopped for a traffic violation or at an equipment check, the follow-
ing three documents must be produced by the driver.
• Driver License  
•  Proof of Insurance  
•  Vehicle Registration
MANDATORY LIABILITY INSURANCE LAW
The Alabama Mandatory Liability Insurance Law provides that no person 
shall operate, register, or maintain registration of a motor vehicle designed 
to be used on a public road or highway unless it is covered by a liability 
insurance policy. The law was passed to protect consumers when they are 
involved in an accident.
Liability insurance policies must be issued by insurers licensed to do business 
in Alabama for no less than:
• 
$25,000 for death or bodily injury to one person;
• 
$50,000 for death or bodily injury to two or more persons; and
• 
$25,000 for damage or destruction of property.
An owner or operator convicted of a mandatory liability insurance violation 
66 
C h a p t e r 6 / T r a f f i c L aw s 
leFt
slow/ stop
right

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
67
may be fined up to $500 for the first violation and up to $1,000 for the second 
or subsequent violation and/or a six month driver’s license suspension.
Phone (334) 242-3000 Email: mli@revenue.alabama.gov
WINDOW TINTING
On all vehicles, regardless of classification, only the upper 6 inches of the 
front windshield may be tinted with a transparent material.  
On passenger cars such as sedans, coupes and station wagons, all windows 
(side and rear) may have tinting that allows at least 32 percent light transmission. 
For other vehicles such as SUVs, trucks, vans and RVs, front-seat side 
windows are subject to the same 32 percent restriction.  Darker tinting is 
permitted on windows behind the driver.  
GAS DRIVE-OFFS
Under Alabama law if you don’t pay for gas you can lose your driver license.
Alabama Senate Bill 459 prohibits a person from driving his or her vehicle 
off the premises of a gasoline establishment without payment. A person who 
does so shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. On a second conviction the 
driver license of the person shall be suspended for a period of six months. On a 
third conviction the driver license of the person shall be suspended for a period 
of one year.
The person shall submit the driver license to the court upon conviction and 
the court shall forward the driver license to the Alabama Law Enforcement 
Agency Driver License Services.
MOVE-OVER LAW
When approaching emergency vehicles stopped with flashing emergency 
lights, or wreckers displaying flashing amber lights, motorists on roadways with 
four or more lanes must vacate the lane closest to the emergency vehicle or 
wrecker. When changing lanes is unsafe or not possible, the driver must slow to 
a  speed that is at least 15 miles per hour less then the posted speed limit. If driv-
ing on a two-lane road, the driver must move as far away from the emergency 
vehicle or wrecker as possible within his or her lane and slow to a speed that is 
15 miles per hour less than the posted speed limit when the posted speed is 25 
miles per hour or greater or travel 10 miles per hour when the posted speed limit 
is 20 miles per hour or less.

68 
C h a p t e r 7 / A d j u s t i n g t o D r i v i n g C o n d i t i o n s 
C H A P T E R  7 
ADJUST TO DRIVING CONDITIONS
Since nearly all motorists learn to drive under normal conditions, many 
are not practiced in handling a car safely under conditions that change with 
the weather, light, emergencies, or with the changes that occur in the human 
body.
Good, safe driving under all conditions does not come to a person natu-
rally, but must be learned through study and experience. Since many of the 
conditions described in this chapter do not occur daily, you should study this 
chapter well so that you can react quickly and properly when they do occur.
NIGHT DRIVING
Approximately half the fatal motor vehicle crashes in Alabama occur dur-
ing the hours of darkness. Several factors contribute to this despite the fact 
that traffic volume is light during this period.
Vision: Most of the contributing factors in night-time crashes are directly 
or indirectly involved with vision. Over driving headlights is a common 
and dangerous practice. You should never drive so fast that you cannot stop 
within the distance you can see ahead with your lights. Headlights on high 
beam normally illuminate the roadway about 350 feet UNDER NORMAL 
CONDITIONS.
Dimming headlights when meeting or following is required by law, as 
well as being a sensible driving practice. You must dim your headlights when 
within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle and within 200 feet when following 
another vehicle. If you do not depress your headlights, you could cause the 
other driver to crash; and if it’s an oncoming vehicle, the driver could crash 
into YOU. In most instances, if you depress your headlights, the oncoming 
driver will do likewise. If, after you depress yours, and the other driver fails 
to do so, keep yours depressed anyway. You prove nothing if you blind the 
approaching driver with your high beam because you are endangering your-
self.
Keep your lighting equipment clean and in good operating condition. 
In addition to insuring that all lights are operating properly, keep the lenses 
clean. Keep all glass on your vehicle free of defects and clean, including free 
of frost and steam.
According to state law, headlights (not parking lights only) must be 
turned on from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise and dur-
ing other periods of limited visibility when you cannot see clearly for at least 
500 feet. As a general rule, if you are in doubt as to when lights are needed, 
turn them on low beam. In addition to improving your own vision, it helps 
others to see you.
It is difficult to see at night. Watch carefully for highway signs, pedestri-
ans, bicycles, slow-moving vehicles and animals on the road.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
69
For night driving, maps should be studied carefully in advance. If you have 
a companion, he or she can serve as a second pair of eyes for you. Have your 
“assistant driver” watch for signs and unexpected hazards. Eye fatigue is com-
mon in night driving. This can be relieved by keeping your eyes moving from 
the road to the sides— from near to far ahead, etc.
Glare: Glare can seriously impair vision, many times to the point of caus-
ing temporary blindness. The most common glare encountered at night is 
that of oncoming headlights or the reflection of following lights in your rear 
view mirror. Glare from oncoming lights can be reduced by directing your 
vision AWAY from them. This is done by looking to the right-hand edge of 
the pavement and concentrating on the white striped line. For glare from the 
rear, use a day-night mirror or adjust your mirror to cut out most of the strong 
light from the rear.
Emergencies: Emergencies are always worse at night than during the day. 
Traffic is lighter, your choices of action are limited, and danger is greater. 
Here are some “do’s and don’ts” for night road emergencies: Pull well off the 
highway or on the shoulder. Activate four-way flashers and raise hood. Stay 
with the car, if possible, until help comes. If you MUST become a pedestrian, 
carry a light and walk on the left edge of the road or shoulder FACING the 
traffic. If you have flares or reflectors, place them from 100 to 500 feet to 
the rear of your vehicle on the right hand edge of the highway to warn other 
traffic.
Speed: Excessive speed is more dangerous at night because of limited 
visibility. You can see only as far as your headlights carry, and at high speeds 
this does not give you sufficient stopping distance. Highways are posted for 
speed limits. Obey these limits, even if you know the road and feel that you 
can drive faster. These limits are imposed for many reasons, but principally 
to protect you from the unexpected. A deer leaps out in front of you or you 
come upon an accident before authorities arrive. Weather conditions may 
have damaged the road or a bridge. If you should doze or suffer some type of 
sudden attack, your chances of surviving are many times improved at lower 
speeds.
WINTER DRIVING
Winter driving brings its own particular dangers. Increased hours of dark-
ness along with fog, rain, snow, sleet, and ice increase driving hazards. The 
smart driver prepares for these adverse conditions. In most instances, bad 
weather cannot be blamed for accidents. A thoughtful driver offsets the haz-
ards of winter by following these additional safe-driving practices.
Before driving, start the engine and let it warm up while you remove snow 
and ice from the car (especially the hood) and windows. Continue to warm 
at a fast idle until the heater and defroster are warm. Be sure that windshield-
washing fluid contains an anti-freeze solution. On extremely cold days, be 
cautious about using windshield washer and wipers at high speeds. Even if the 
fluid contains antifreeze, high speed combined with extreme cold can freeze 

70 
C h a p t e r 7 / A d j u s t i n g t o D r i v i n g C o n d i t i o n s 
the solution on the windshield and totally obscure your vision.
Get the feel of the road. Try your brakes while driving slowly to find out 
just how slippery the road is and then adjust your speed to the situation.
Snow treads on the drive wheels are recommended for general driving dur-
ing snow. They greatly improve general traction, including starting and stop-
ping. Don’t be over-confident because you have them on. You still must drive at 
less than normal speed on snow and allow more room for stopping.
Although snow treads are a great help under normal winter driving condi-
tions, they do not give proper traction on ice. For extremely icy conditions, 
hard packed snow, and very deep snow, reinforced tire chains are the best.
WINDSHIELD WIPERS/HEADLIGHTS
Alabama law requires that headlights be turned on when the windshield 
wipers of the vehicle are in use because of rain, sleet, or snow.  Intermittent use 
of windshield wipers does not require headlight usage. 
SLIPPERY ROADS ARE HAZARDOUS
Follow other cars at a safe distance. Remember that on snow or ice it takes 
three to twelve times as much distance to stop your car as on dry pavement. 
Keep well back of the vehicle ahead of you to give yourself plenty of room to 
stop.
To start on snow and ice, lower your engine speed to its very minimum. If 
you have a car with a clutch, let the clutch out very slowly in starting. If your 
wheels spin, start in second or high gear. This permits a smoother acceleration 
and should aid you in avoiding spinning or sliding the wheels. If you have an 
automatic transmission, accelerate slowly and smoothly.
When stopping on packed snow or ice, apply the brakes gently. If you should 
have to stop suddenly on a slippery surface, pump your brakes. If your wheels 
lock, release the brake to get them rolling again, then squeeze down again and 
keep repeating the pumping action until the vehicle stops. Stopping this way 
will slow your vehicle gradually instead of causing it to skid. While making your 
stop, be sure to release the pressure on the brakes at the first hint the wheels are 
starting to slip; and do not depress the clutch to take the vehicle out of gear.
SKIDDING
A vehicle skids when its tires lose their grip on the roadway. When your car 
begins to skid, the engine loses its pulling effect and the brakes lose their effec-
tiveness. The steering wheel also seems to be ineffective.
Since braking will only increase the velocity of the skid and cause the loss of 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
71
steering control when the front wheels lock, do not apply pressure on the brake 
until you regain control of your forward direction. Then carefully apply the 
brakes if necessary.
With any vehicle skid, the main idea is to keep the rear end from outrunning 
the front. So to overcome a skid, you must either slow the rear wheels some-
what or speed the front wheels.
With a conventional rear-wheel drive vehicle, when you ease off the gas, the 
engine acts as a brake to slow the rear wheels slightly. This slows the rear-end 
slide and gives time for the front end to catch up and, combined with steering, 
will get the vehicle going straight again.
To achieve the same effect WITH FRONT-WHEEL DRIVE VEHICLES, 
you have to make the engine pull harder on the front wheels. STEPPING 
LIGHTLY ON THE GAS WILL INCREASE FRONT WHEEL SPEED, 
so the front end can catch up with the sliding rear end and straighten out the 
skid.
In some situations there may not be enough room to step on the gas. The 
next best action is to disengage the transmission, either by jamming in the 
clutch with standard transmission vehicles or shifting into neutral with auto-
matic transmission, and steer in the direction the rear of the vehicle is skidding. 
CAUTION: Many safety experts hesitate to recommend shifting into neutral 
because, in a panic of skidding, drivers may take their attention off the road 
or accidentally shift past neutral into reverse, and either reaction is potentially 
disastrous.
HYDROPLANING -“WATER SKIING ON THE HIGHWAY”
Hydroplaning, as a cause of skids, has only recently been investigated. It 
takes place when you’re driving on wet roads. At speeds up to 35 mph, most 
tires will “wipe” the road surface, the same way  a windshield wiper cleans 
the windshield. As the speed increases, the tires cannot wipe the road as well 
and start to ride on a film of water, just like a set of water skis. In a standard 
passenger car, partial hydroplaning starts at about 35 mph and increases with 
speed to about 55 mph, at which point the tires may be totally on the water. In 
a severe rainstorm the tires lose all contact with the road at 55 mph. If this is 
the case, there is no friction available to brake, accelerate, or corner. A gust of 
wind, a change of road pitch or a slight turn can create an unpredictable and 
uncontrollable skid.
Although our knowledge of hydroplaning is limited, we do know how you 
can handle it. The best thing to do is to take your foot off the accelerator and 
let the car slow down. If you skid while your car is only partially hydroplaning, 
you should be able to regain control by correcting the particular type of skid 
that occurs. If you’re totally hydroplaning, about all you can do is release the 
accelerator and ride out the skid.
To prevent hydroplaning, it is most helpful to have good tires with deep 
treads. The treads allow the water to escape from under the tires and tend to 
prevent complete hydroplaning at normal highway speeds. When the depth 
of the water exceeds the depth of the treads, complete hydroplaning can be 

72 
C h a p t e r 7 / A d j u s t i n g t o D r i v i n g C o n d i t i o n s 
expected at speeds above 50 mph.
DRIVING IN FOG, SNOW
Avoid driving in fog or a snowstorm unless it’s absolutely necessary. When 
visibility is limited, speed must be reduced and you must be ready to stop 
within the limits of your vision.
Keep headlights on low beam to reduce the glaring reflection of your 
lights on the thick fog blanket or blinding snow. If it is impossible to see or 
you become weary of straining your eyes to see with such poor visibility, pull 
completely off the road, leave lights on and park. Wait until visibility improves.
DRIVING IN HILLY COUNTRY
Use extra caution when driving on narrow, hilly roads or where thick brush 
and wooded areas frequently block your view. There are many blind pockets 
within hilly areas and you may not realize another car is on the same road until 
it’s within a few feet of you.
Don’t hesitate to use your horn, as you round hazardous curves to let the 
other drivers know they aren’t alone on the narrow road.
The law also forbids you to coast downhill with the transmission in neutral.
CARBON MONOXIDE
Carbon monoxide poisoning is much more likely to occur during wintertime 
driving when you are more apt to drive with all the windows closed and to warm 
the engine before using the car. Carbon monoxide fumes are odorless and deadly. 
Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning are sudden weariness, yawning, dizzi-
ness and nausea. The only cure is to go to an adequate supply of fresh air. Simple 
precautions to avoid carbon monoxide poisoning are:
• Have the exhaust system checked regularly to be sure it does not leak.
• Do not idle the motor or drive with all the windows closed tightly.
• Do not warm up the motor while the vehicle is in a closed garage.
DRIVING EMERGENCIES
There is one basic rule that applies in all driving situations, and especially 
in emergency situations - THINK BEFORE YOU ACT. Often, an instinctive 
reaction such as slamming on your brakes while skidding, may be the wrong 
reaction.
The suggestions below are designed to help you if you are faced with a sud-
den driving emergency. Remember that these are only suggestions. In some 
emergency situations, there is little that the driver can do but hang on and hope. 
In other cases, a driver who understands the basic principles described below 
can minimize the consequences of a sudden emergency.
• Blowouts: A blowout is a sudden collapse of a tire. This throws the vehicle 
out of control. To regain control, hold tightly to the steering wheel, steer 
straight and ease up on the accelerator. Do not brake until the vehicle 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
73
is under control. You may receive warning of an impending blowout by 
a thumping sound caused by a bulge in the tire. If the tire is losing air 
rapidly, it will pull the car to the side. Under-inflation is one of the most 
common reasons for blowouts.
• Loss of a wheel: This is a situation that is similar to a blowout. Often 
the warning signs are the same - a thumping noise and/or a pulling to one 
side. The same basic rules apply for recovery of control: hold tightly to the 
steering wheel, steer straight ahead, ease up on the accelerator, and do not 
brake until the vehicle has slowed down and is completely under control.
• Steering failure: If you suddenly lose control of your steering and the 
wheel no longer responds to your turning movements, ease up on the 
accelerator, but do not brake. Your car may have enough natural balance 
to keep it moving forward as you slow it down. If you brake or try to shift 
gears, this sudden change in speed may throw the vehicle off balance and 
out of control. As the car slows down, you may be able to brake very gently 
to help bring it to a stop.
• Brake failure: If your brake pedal suddenly sinks all the way to the floor, 
try pumping the pedal to build up the pressure. You will generally receive 
advance warning that your brakes are starting to fail when the pedal feels 
spongy and slowly continues to sink while being depressed. If pumping 
the pedal does not build up the pressure, use your emergency or parking 
brake, but apply gently so that you do not lock the brakes and throw your 
car into a skid. If you can shift to a lower gear, the engine will slow you 
down. You can turn off the engine - leaving the car in gear - and the engine 
will slow you down. If you have power steering or power brakes, you will 
lose this assistance when you turn off the engine.
• Running off the pavement: If your wheels drift onto the shoulder of 
the road, don’t try to swerve back onto the pavement because you might 
throw your car off balance. Instead, stay on the shoulder and reduce speed. 
After you’ve slowed down, turn gently back onto the pavement.
• Car approaching in your lane. If you see a car coming toward you in 
your lane, pull to the right and slow down. Sound your horn. At night, 
flash your lights. You may wake up the drowsy or inattentive driver 
approaching you. Do not turn into the left lane because the driver of the 
oncoming vehicle might wake up and swing back into the path of your 
car.
• Car attempting to pass you: If a car is attempting to pass you and can-
not complete the movement because of oncoming traffic, you must act to 
prevent a crash, which could also involve you. If the passing car is at a point 
where the pass can be completed with your help, slow your speed to allow 
the driver to move ahead of you quickly. If it becomes definite that the 
driver cannot complete the pass and must drop back, increase your speed 
leaving room for the vehicle to again move in behind you. If the right shoul-
der is adequate and a crash is almost certain, move quickly onto the shoulder 

74 
C h a p t e r 7 / A d j u s t i n g t o D r i v i n g C o n d i t i o n s 
to allow the passing car to move into your lane.
•	Stalling on railroad tracks: If your car stalls on railroad tracks and it has a 
manual transmission, you may be able to move it off the tracks by running 
the starter while the car is in low or second gear. If you have an automatic 
transmission, you will have to push the car off the tracks. If you cannot get 
the car off the tracks, and a train is approaching, abandon the vehicle, and 
quickly walk alongside the tracks in the direction of the approaching train 
so that you will not be struck by debris when the vehicle is hit.
• Immersion: If your car plunges into deep water BUT DOES NOT 
SINK, immediately escape through a window. Opening a door, even if 
possible, will permit the water to enter the car more rapidly. If the car 
SINKS beneath the surface before you can escape, the weight of the engine 
will force the front end down first. This usually creates an air pocket in the 
back of the car. Get into the air area and breath deeply. When the car has 
settled you should be able to escape through a ­window.
• Fire: If smoke comes from under the hood, get off the road and turn off 
the ignition. If no fire extinguisher is available, use dirt or sand to smother 
the fire. Do not use water, for burning gasoline will float on it and spread 
the blaze.
• Overheating: You can help prevent overheating in slow-moving traffic by 
shifting into neutral and racing the engine briefly during stops. This will 
speed up the fan and the water pump. If steam begins to come from under 
the hood, your cooling system is boiling. Pull to the side of the road and turn 
off your engine. DO NOT OPEN THE RADIATOR CAP.
• Headlight failure: If your headlights suddenly fail, try your parking lights 
and directional signals—one of the two may work and give you enough 
light to guide you as you leave the road. If your lights fail on a busy or 
lighted highway, you will probably have enough light from other sources 
to guide you off the road. If all the lights fail on a dark, deserted high-
way, slow down and try to keep your car on the pavement until you have 
reduced speed enough so that you can move onto the shoulder without 
striking an obstruction.
• Windshield wiper failure: If your wipers suddenly fail in blinding rain or 
snow, slow down, roll down your side window, and put your head out so 
that you can see ahead. Then move your car off the highway. Use the same 
procedure if your hood should suddenly open and blind you.
• Stuck accelerator pedal: If your accelerator pedal sticks, you may be able 
to free it by hooking your toe under the pedal and attempting to raise it. 
If not, you can turn the engine off and thus slow the vehicle down. If you 
have power steering or power brakes, you will lose this assistance when you 
cut the engine.

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
75
C H A P T E R  8
DRIVING THE FREEWAYS
Freeways are multi-lane, controlled access, divided highways that permit 
you to drive long distances without interruption, with minimum fatigue and 
maximum safety. There are no stops and cross traffic on the freeways. If you 
know how to use them properly you can get where you’re going sooner and 
have a better chance to arrive safely. It is therefore important that you know and 
understand the distinctive features of freeways.
Safe use of freeways demands knowledge of special types of hazards. Among 
other things, it requires that you keep pace with traffic and stay alert. Slower 
moving vehicles, those traveling at less than the normal speed of traffic at that 
time, MUST KEEP TO THE RIGHT.
Cutting from one lane to another is a dangerous practice. Choose the lane 
in which traffic is moving at the pace you prefer and stay in it. If you must 
change lanes to pass or leave the freeway, check traffic carefully and signal well 
in advance of your move.
In case of emergencies, such as mechanical breakdowns, park entirely off 
the traveled portion and stay with your vehicle if at all possible. Open the 
trunk, raise the hood if weather permits and tie a white cloth to a door handle 
or antenna, where it can best be seen. These are distress signals, and any law 
enforcement officer seeing them will give you assistance. Other than in a case 
of emergency, parking is not permitted on the freeway.
For highway emergencies, to report accidents and drunk drivers, 
dial *HP or (*47) toll-free on your cell-phone to contact Alabama State 
Troopers.
ENTERING THE FREEWAY
Entrance ramps are provided for entering freeways. These are short, one-way 
ramps that permit safe and easy entry. The entrance ramp will take you to a spe-
cial acceleration lane. As you approach and enter the acceleration lane, increase 
speed to match that of vehicles in the through lanes, if possible. Watch for an 
opening, activate your turn signal, and merge smoothly with the other traffic. 
Drivers on the freeway should allow room for those entering, but you must 
yield to them if they do not. DO NOT come to a full stop in the acceleration 
lane unless absolutely necessary.

76 
C h a p t e r 8 / D r i v i n g t h e F r e e way s 
When a YIELD sign is in place at an entrance ramp with no acceleration 
lane, entering traffic must obey the YIELD sign and stop if necessary rather 
than force their way into the traffic stream.
INTERCHANGES
The intersection of two highways at different levels (over and under) 
with separate connecting roads for the transfer of traffic from one highway 
to the other is called an interchange. This design feature enables vehicles to 
cross, enter, or leave either highway without interfering with other vehicles. 
Four of the most common types of interchanges are called “directional,” 
“cloverleaf,” “diamond,” and “trumpet”.
DIREcTIONAL INTERCHANGE:
This type is used where a high volume of traffic desires to transfer 
between only two legs of the interchange. The directional ramp shown in 
the above illustration is designed to accommodate high volumes of traffic 
from west to north. Other movements are accomplished on the conven-
tional diamond type ramps.
CLOVERLEAF INTERCHANGE:
Designed to allow turning movements off or onto the freeway from four 
directions, using loop type connections. It eliminates left turn and cross 
traffic conflicts for all movements.
DireCtionAl
CloVerleAF
DiAMonD
truMpet

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
77
DIAMOND INTERCHANGE: 
Characterized by four ramps, allowing vehicles to enter or leave the main 
highway while flowing with the traffic. Left turns are made AFTER leaving 
the freeway.
TRUMPET INTERCHANGE: 
Provides access to a freeway when another roadway connects, forming a 
“T” intersection. It is a variation of directional or diamond type interchanges 
to permit turning movements on and off the highway.
LEAVING THE FREEWAY
Getting off the freeway at the right place requires advance planning 
and close observance of all signs. Prepare for your exit by moving into the 
proper lane well in advance. Signal your turn, move into the deceleration 
lane and reduce your speed as you prepare to enter the exit ramp. Never 
reduce speed suddenly on the freeway. As you move into the exit ramp, be 
prepared to yield or stop when you come to the intersecting roadway.
If you miss your exit you must not stop, back up, or attempt to turn-
around; proceed to the next exit and come back to the one you missed.

78 
C h a p t e r 9 / Y o u r V e h i c l e 
C H A P T E R  9
YOUR VEHICLE
Motorists cannot be safe drivers unless their vehicles are properly 
equipped and in good mechanical condition.
Alabama law specifies the safety equipment you must have on your vehi-
cle. There are different regulations regarding different types of vehicles.
BRAKES: 
All automobiles must have two separate methods of applying brakes. 
They must have a regular foot brake and a parking brake.
MUFFLERS: 
Every vehicle must be equipped with a muffler in good working order. It 
must eliminate excessive or unusual noise such as a sharp popping or crack-
ing sound. Muffler cutouts, bypasses or similar devices are forbidden. The 
exhaust system must not leak carbon monoxide fumes into the interior of 
the vehicle. The system should be checked periodically to be sure it is not 
leaking.
WINDSHIELD WIPERS:
Every motor vehicle having a windshield must be equipped with wind-
shield wipers in good working order.
REAR VIEW MIRRORS:
To enable the driver to see 200 feet to the rear are required on all 
vehicles.
LIGHTS:
Motor vehicles must be equipped with at least two headlights (white 
lights), a rear license plate light, a brake light, and at least one red taillight. 
All lights must be visible from a distance of at least 500 feet. The high beam 
of the headlight must illuminate objects at a minimum of 350 feet and be 
in adjustment and alignment. Other vehicles must be equipped as required 
by law.
OTHER LIGHTS: 
The use of both left and right turn signal lights or other pairs of lights 
flashing simultaneously to indicate a vehicular hazard is permitted. 
SAFETY BELTS:
Statistics show that in a crash, steering assemblies cause 30 percent of fatal 
injuries, and another 40 percent of deaths are caused by striking the windshield, 
windshield frame or instrument panel. Safety belts can prevent these “second 

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
79
collisions.”  For children under six years old, special child and infant restraints 
are needed to protect them from serious injury or death. Traffic accidents are 
the number one killer of children and these restraints for small children can 
prevent them from becoming “flying missiles” in a traffic crash.
YOUR CAR MUST HAVE THIS EQUIPMENT
HORNS
A horn (in good working order) is required on all motor vehicles. Use 
it to warn children, bicyclists, pedestrians and motorists you are passing. 
Bells, sirens or exhaust whistles may not be used except for emergency 
vehicles.
Needless use of your horn may result in an arrest. It is unlawful to use a 
motor vehicle horn for any purpose except in giving warning when reason-
ably necessary to insure safe operation. Never use the horn to announce 
arrival or call your passengers.
TIRES
With the increasing number of miles being driven on high-speed high-
ways, safe tires are  important. It is important that you buy the proper tires 
for your particular car to be sure that they will carry the weight. Check 
tire pressure often and never drive with them under-inflated. When your 
car is being serviced, check your tires for cuts, bruises, foreign objects or 
other faults. If wear is uneven, have wheels and/or alignment inspected. Be 
sure that you have enough rubber; a tire is illegal if your tread is less than 
1/16 inch deep. Treat your tires kindly, do not make “jack-rabbit” starts 
or screeching halts unless absolutely necessary. Take it easy on corners and 
over extremely rough surfaces. Take a break and let them cool during long 
trips during warm weather.  Never use different types of tires. Check with 
your dealer about mixing types on front and back.  Your spare tire should 
be checked periodically, you may need it.
Mirror
BrAKes
horn
sAFety glAss
heAD lights
gooD tires
seAt Belts
signAl
lights
liCense plAte
AnD light
pArKing
BrAKe
MuFFler AnD
tight exhAust
systeM
BrAKe lights
AnD
tAil lights
wipers

80 
C h a p t e r 9 / Y o u r V e h i c l e 
MAINTENANCE
The only efficient, safe vehicle is one that is properly maintained. Brakes, 
exhaust systems, cooling systems, lights, windshield wipers, tires become worn 
and defective and need maintenance from time to time. If not properly main-
tained, any one of these items could be the cause of a serious accident.
As a safety measure, it is advisable to have your car checked. In this way, 
defective equipment will be repaired.
PLAN YOUR TRIP
Plan your trip in advance. Use a map and decide exactly where to get on and 
off the freeway.
CHECK YOUR CAR’S GASOLINE GAUGE and get fuel if you do not 
have enough for your trip. Check for water and oil needs. There are no service 
stations located directly on freeways.
Make sure your car is in good mechanical condition. Check your tires, 
including spares, to make certain they are properly inflated, have good tread 
and are free of cuts.
THE DEATH ZONE
CAUTION: The majority of children injured or killed in pupil transporta-
tion are not injured or killed on the bus, but outside the bus. Most are struck 
by motorists who fail to stop for the flashing red lights and extended stop signs. 
This area around the stopped school bus is referred to as the “DEATH ZONE.”

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
81
ALABAMA LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY 
PARENT/TEEN DRIVING
AGREEMENT
www.ParentingTeenDrivers.com
• I will obey driving laws, including speed limits.
• I will wear my seatbelt at all times and make all passengers wear seatbelts. I will 
check to make sure all belts are fastened before I drive. 
• I will not use a cell phone or any other electronic device while driving.  I will 
pull over to make calls, receive calls, text or use any electronic device in any way. 
• Limit on passengers:  Immediately after I receive my license, I will not be 
allowed to have any passengers except by parents’ permission.  As I gain experi-
ence, I will be allowed one passenger.  Over time, this will be subject to change, 
but only after discussions with my parents.
• I must ask permission to drive, every time I drive, until my parents withdraw 
this rule. I will not make unscheduled stops or side trips. 
• When I am away from my parents, I will keep them informed of exactly where 
I am.
• I will not leave the scene of an accident, no matter how minor, without the 
permission of police officers and/or my parents.
• No alcohol use/abuse.  It is illegal for me to drink alcohol.  However, if I do 
break the law by drinking anything alcoholic I will not drive for 24 hours. 
• No drug use/abuse. I will not allow alcohol or illegal drugs in the car. 
• I will not ride as a passenger with any driver who has used alcohol or any 
drug as defined above.
• I will engage in no thrill-seeking behavior while driving.  Driving too fast, rac-
ing of all kinds, and any kind of “stunt” involving a car are NOT ALLOWED. 
Driving is for transportation ONLY.
• I will inform my parents about any and all tickets, accidents, and encounters 
with police (including warnings.) 
• I will not allow any other person to drive the car without my parents’ specific 
permission for each specific case. 
• Car audio system.  For the first month I drive, I will not have the car stereo on. 
After the first month, I will talk to my parents about allowed use of the audio 
system.  

82 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
• Emotional upset.  Knowing that judgment and driving skills are altered by 
emotions, I will not drive when I am upset or angry.  If upset, I will contact my 
parents for transportation and I reserve the right to maintain my privacy regard-
ing personal matters. 
• Friends ride only with their parents’ permission.  When transporting my 
friends, I will be reasonably sure that they have their parents’ permission to ride 
with me. 
• I will not smoke and will not allow smoking in the car.
• I will not eat while driving. 
• I will not do things while driving which distract me. 
CONSEQUENCES:  If I violate the rules in this contract, my parents will not 
allow me to drive, without a parent in the car with me, for some period of time.
DRIVER________________________________ 	 _____________ 	(date) 
PARENT(s)/Guardian(s) ____________________ 	 _____________ 	 (date) 
THIS CONTRACT WILL BE REVIEWED AND POSSIBLY REVISED 
ON ________________________(date).  
KEY POINTS!
OBEY THE LAW
DRIVE ONLY WITH PERMISSION
SEAT BELTS
PASSENGERS ARE LIMITED
NO CELL PHONE USE WHILE 
DRIVING
PARENTS MUST KNOW WHERE I AM
DON’T LEAVE SCENE OF ACCIDENT
NO ALCOHOL, DRUGS, OR TOBACCO
NO EATING

 
A l a b a m a L aw E n f o r c e m e n t A g e n c y 
83
GDL SUMMARY:
1.	 Does not apply to individuals 18 years of age 
or older.
2.	 Does not apply to individuals 17 years of age 
or older who have had a valid drivers license 
for 6 months or longer.
3.	 Does not apply to individuals who are 16 
years of age or older who are married or the 
head of household.
4.	 Does not apply to individuals that have been 
legally relieved of minority status (the state 
or period of being below the legal age).
5.	  A person under the age of 18 may not apply 
for an unrestricted driver license until that 
person has held a learner license for at least 
a six-month period with no violations of the 
restrictions. (Must be 17.)
15 year olds with a valid learner license are 
authorized to drive while accompanied by a par-
ent, legal guardian or a person who is 21 years 
of age or older who is a licensed driver and occu-
pies the front seat next to the driver or when 
accompanied by a licensed or certified driving 
instructor occupying the front seat by the driver.
16 year olds must have parental or legal 
guardian’s permission to receive a license and to 
drive without supervision.
RESTRICTIONS:
Restrictions on the license of a person who is 16 
years of age or age 17 with a license less than 6 
months:
1.	 May not have more than 1 nonfamily passenger 
other than the parent, guardian or supervising 
licensed driver at least 21 years of age. (New for 
2010, reduced from four.)
2.	 The student may not operate a vehicle between 
12 midnight and 6 a.m. unless accompanied by 
a parent or legal guardian unless:
• 	Accompanied by a licensee 21 years of age or 
older with parental consent.
• 	Going to or from their regular workplace.
• 	Going to or from a school sponsored event.
•	 Going to or from a religious sponsored 
event.
•	 Driving due to a medical, fire, or law 
enforcement related emergency.
3.	 Drive while operating any handheld commu-
nication device. (New for 2010) Violations will 
result in an extension of the graduated license 
period and/or suspension of the license.
ENFORCEMENT:
Violation of the above conditions will cause 
the licensee to be guilty of a traffic violation, but 
shall not be subject to any criminal penalties or 
court costs.  No citation will be issued for a traffic 
violation unless the licensee is stopped for a separate 
violation of the law and issued a citation or warrant 
for the separate violation.  No points will be assessed 
for violation of the above restrictions.
Violation of any of the above restrictions will 
result in the restrictive period being extended by 6 
months or until the driver reaches 18 years of age.
If a licensee is convicted of a second moving 
traffic violation or is convicted of failure to give 
information, render aid, racing, fleeing, or attempt-
ing to elude a law enforcement officer, reckless 
driving, illegal passing, driving on the wrong side of 
the road, or any other offense where four or more 
points are assessed, their license will automatically 
be suspended for 60 days or until age 18, which-
ever comes first.  This rule will also apply to other 
violations as designated by rules or regulations that 
may be imposed pursuant to the Administrative 
Procedure Act.
ATTENTION 15, 16 & 17  YEAR OLD DRIVERS!!
GDL (Graduated Drivers License)—Act #02-408
2010 Amendments Effective 7/1/2010

84  
A l A b A m A l Aw E n f o r c E m E n t A g E n c y 
The Driver License Services Web link contains a variety of information that 
we hope will help you.  From online driver manuals to information on test-
ing procedures and schedules, our Web site was designed to be your one-
stop for all your Driver License needs.
Alabama Drivers License Offices
Telephone Numbers
Birmingham ....... 205 252-7445
Decatur .............. 256 351-4667
Dothan............... 334 983-5616
Evergreen ........... 251 578-5726
Huntsville .......... 256 539-0681
Jacksonville ........ 256 435-7006
Mobile ............... 251 660-2330
Montgomery ...... 334 274-0307
Opelika .............. 334 742-9986
Quad Cities ........ 256 383-2923
Selma ................. 334 875-1341
Tuscaloosa .......... 205 553-0729
Visit Our Web Site At 
www.alea.gov

Driver License Appointments
Check our website at www.alea.gov/driver license 
for locations offering online scheduling.
Appointments may also be requested by 
phone during regular business hours.
All request must be made 48 hours prior
to the preferred date of test.
Renew or replace your driver license 
or state ID online at: www.alea.gov 
quicklink www.alabama.gov.
is available to qualified individuals 
at any Driver License examining office 
operated by the Alabama Law Enforcement 
Agency. Visit our Web Site
www.alea.gov/driver license
MOVING? LET US KNOW!
Alabama driver license holders have 30 days in which to inform the 
Driver License Services of a change of address. Change of address forms are 
available on our website at www.alea.gov/driver license/change of address.
Write:	
Alabama Law Enforcement Agency
	
License Services Division
 
PO Box 1471
 
Montgomery AL  36102-1471
Phone: 
334-242-4400  (menu selection)
Website:	
www.alea.gov/driver license/change of address form
Schedule DL Appointment on line, visit:
 www.alea.gov/driver license/Schedule DL Appointment

