OFFICIAL
INCLUDES
Complete Test Questions
and Answers From 
State of Hawaii
Dept. Of Transportation
INCLUDES
Complete Test Questions
and Answers From 
State of Hawaii
Dept. Of Transportation
$5.20
DRIVER LICENSING OFFICES
City & County of Honolulu
Honolulu - Kapalama Hale, 925 Dillingham Boulevard, Suite 101A Phone 768-9100
Downtown, 1000 Fort Street Mall (renewals & duplicates, 8:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.), Phone 
768-4145
Hawaii Kai Town Center, 6600 Kalanianaole Highway #101, (renewals & duplicates, 
8:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.), Phone 768-4800 
Aiea - Pearlridge Shopping Center, 98-1005 Moanalua Road 244B (renewals 
&duplicates, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.), Phone 768-5000
Kaneohe - Koolau Center, 47-388 Hui Iwa Street, Phone 239-6301
Windward City Shopping Center, 45-480 Kaneohe Bay Drive C06 (renewals & 
duplicates, 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.), Phone 768-4100
Kapolei - 1000 Uluohia Street, Phone 768-3100
Wahiawa - 330 North Cane Street, Phone 768-4054
Waianae - 85-670 Farrington Highway (Monday & Wednesday), Phone 768-4222
County of Hawaii
Visit http://www.hawaiicounty.gov/finance-dl-general-info
Hours of Operation Monday - Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Testing Hours 8:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.
Hilo Office, 349 Kapiolani Street, Phone 961-2222
West Hawaii Civic Center, 74-5044 Ane Keohokalole Highway, Phone 323-4800
Naalehu Office, 95-5355 Mamalahoa Highway, Phone 854-7214 (Tuesdays and 
Wednesdays by appointment only)
Pahoa Office, 15-2615 Keaau-Pahoa Road, Phone 965-2721 (M-F 8:00 a.m. - 3:30 a.m.)
Waimea Center, 65-1158 Mamalahoa Highway Suite 1-A, Phone 881-3488
County of Maui
Visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/1328/Motor-Vehicle-Licensing or call 808-270-7363 
Hours of Operations Monday - Friday except Holidays 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Written tests are administered between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
Kahului Service Center, Maui Mall, 70 E. Kaahumanu Avenue, Suite A17
Lahaina, Lahaina Gateway, 335 Keawe Street, Suite 209
Pukalani, Hannibal Tarvares Community Center, 91 Pukalani Street
Kihei, Kihei Community Center, 303 East Lipoa Street
Hana, County Public Works Office, Hana Hwy & Uakea Road, M-F, 8;00-10:45 a.m. 
& 12:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Phone 248-7280
Molokai, Mitchell Pauole Center, 100 Ailoa Street, Phone 553-3430
Lanai, 309 Seventh Street #101, M-F except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. & 1:00 
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Phone 565-7878
County of Kauai
Visit https://www.kauai.gov/DriversLicense
Hours of Operation Monday-Friday except holidays 7:45 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Lihue Civic Center, Kapule Building, 4444 Rice Street Suite 480, Phone 241-4242
(c) Copyright 1977, 2006 Director of Transportation, State of Hawaii
No part of this manual may be reproduced in any form without the written 
permission of the Director of Transportation of the State of Hawaii. Printed and 
published by Hagadone Printing Company, Inc.
274 Puuhale Road, Honolulu, Hawaii 96819, Phone 847-5310
HPC 10/18
http://www.honolulu.gov/csd/dllicense.html
Hours of Operation Moday - Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Testing Hours 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Aloha,
You are about to learn the skills and assume the responsibilities of 
driving on the roadways in our State. As you drive, I ask that you obey 
our traffic laws and develop safe driving habits. Please keep in mind 
that you have a legal and moral responsibility for the safety of others.
I encourage you to show your “aloha spirit” when you drive. Be patient, 
courteous and watch the road at all times. The information in this 
manual will teach you to be a safe and respectful driver. Please read it 
carefully and apply that knowledge daily. By becoming a good driver, 
other motorists will follow your lead.
Be safe and enjoy driving in our beautiful State.
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Sincerely,
 
E X E C U T I V E  C H A M B E R S 
 
H O N O L U L U  
 
 
 
DAVID Y. IGE 
   GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
DAVID Y. IGE 
 
Governor, State of Hawai‘i 
RESPONSIBLE AGENCIES and WEBSITES
1.
State of Hawaii Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Safety Office
http://hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/library/motor-vehicle-safety-office/
(Program Coordination)
2.
City and County of Honolulu
Department of Customer Service
www.co.honolulu.hi.us/csd/vehicle
3.
Maui County
Department of Finance
www.mauicounty.gov
4.
Hawaii County
Department of Finance
Vehicle Registration and Licensing Division
http://www.hawaiicounty.gov/finance-vrl/
5.
Kauai County
Department of Finance
http://kauai.gov/DriversLicense
NOTE: For further information see inside front and back covers.
4
STATE OF HAWAII DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
5
6
INTRODUCTION
	
This manual is designed for use as a guide to help you become a safer driver and 
to help you qualify for a Hawaii driver’s license. The information contained herein 
does not supersede either state laws or county ordinances or any duly adopted rule or 
regulation.
 	
Additional manuals are sold at the driver licensing offices.
	
A separate Motorcycle Operator Manual, DOTH2053, is available to provide
	
more comprehensive coverage of laws and operating techniques concerning 
	
motorcycles.
	
A separate Driver’s Manual for Commercial Vehicle Driver Licensing,
	
DOTH2044, is available to prepare drivers to pass the knowledge and skill tests 
	
to get a commercial driver’s license.
	
Occasionally changes to rules or laws are made between printings of this manual. 
You may check for updated information at the web sites listed on Page 4. These sites 
provide details about documents that are required to prove identity, date of birth, social 
security number, legal presence in the USA and principal residence. Some documents 
can serve more than one purpose. For example, a birth certificate can document a 
person’s legal name, date of birth and legal presence. Two documents are required to 
prove principal residence. Details about acceptable documents to prove identity, date 
of birth, social security number, legal presence and principal residence are available 
at web site http://hidot.hawaii.gov/hawaiis-legal-presence-law/.  Additional informa-
tion is available in Hawaii Administrative rules 19-122 located at web site http://hidot.
hawaii.gov/highways/home/doing-business/hawaii-administrative-rules/.
STATE OF HAWAII DRIVER’S MANUAL
MESSAGE FROM THE GOVERNOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
LIST OF RESPONSIBLE AGENCIES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
TABLE OF CONTENTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
DEFINITION OF TERMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Chapter I
Licensing of Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chapter II
Vehicle Equipment and Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Chapter III
Vehicle Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Chapter IV
The Driver  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Chapter V
Traffic Laws, Ordinances, Rules and Regulations . . . . . . . . 26
Chapter VI
Signals, Signs and Lane Markings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Chapter VII
Accident Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Chapter VIII
No Fault Insurance—Financial Responsibility  . . . . . . . . . . 53
Chapter IX
Alcohol and Other Drugs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Chapter X
Safe Driving Techniques  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter XI
Trucks, Buses and Motorcycles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Chapter XII
Pedestrian Safety  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Chapter XIII
Bicycle Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
APPENDIX
Questions with Illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Location of Offices and Facilities, Hours of Operation and
Telephone Numbers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . inside front and
back covers
7
DEFINITIONS
Abandoned Vehicle
Any vehicle left unattended on the highway for more than 24
hours.
Emergency Vehicle
Any vehicle of the police and fire departments or federal
agency having similar functions and any federal, state and
county ambulance and any private vehicle designated by
ordinance, properly equipped with a blue or red flashing light
and warning sound system.
Bicycle
A device with two or three wheels having a diameter of 16" or
greater propelled by human power.
Bus
Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten pas-
sengers and used for the transportation of persons.
Business District
The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any six hundred feet along such highway there are
buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which
occupy at least three hundred feet of frontage on one side or
three hundred feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
Commercial Motor
Vehicle
For purposes of driver licensing, means a motor vehicle or 
combination of motor vehicles used in commerce to transport 
passengers or property:
(1)  If the vehicle has a gross combination weight rating of 
26,001 or more pounds inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds;
(2)  If a single vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 
26,001 or more pounds;
(3)  If the vehicle (any GVWR), is designed to transport sixteen 
or more occupants including the driver; or
(4)  If the vehicle, (any GVWR), is used in the transportation of 
hazardous materials requiring placarding.
For purposes of motor carrier regulations, means any 
self-propelled or towed motor vehicle used on a highway in 
commerce to transport passengers or property when the vehicle
1) Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight rating, or gross vehicle weight or gross combination 
weight, of 10,001 pounds or more, whichever is greater; or 
(2) Is designed or used to transport more than 8 passengers 
(including the driver) for compensation; or 
8
—
9
Safety Zone	
The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
(3) Is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers, 
including the driver, and is not used to transport passengers for 
compensation; or 
(4) Is used in transporting hazardous material in a quantity 
requiring placarding. 
marked as to be plainly visible.
NOTE:	 Additional definitions may be found in The Statewide Traffic Code, Hawaii
Revised Statutes 291C and 286-2, HRS. See web site http://capitol.hawaii.gov/.
Commercial Driver’s A license issued by a state or other jurisdiction in accordance 
License
with the standards contained in 49 CFR Part 383 to an indi-
vidual which authorizes the individual to operate a class of
commercial motor vehicle.
Crosswalk
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the
absence of curbs, from the edges of the transversable roadway;
or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere dis-
tinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other mark-
ings on the surface.
Driver
Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
Gross Vehicle
The weight of the vehicle plus the vehicle’s load-carrying
Weight Rating
capacity.
Highway
The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
CHAPTER 1
LICENSING OF DRIVERS
PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM LICENSE
YOU ARE EXEMPTED FROM OBTAINING A HAWAII DRIVER’S LICENSE:
1. When you are employed by and driving a motor vehicle owned by the federal
government that does not fit the definition of a commercial motor vehicle
(federal fire fighters and active duty military are exempt) and possess a valid
driver’s license issued by an agency of the federal government.
2. When you are thirteen years of age or older and operating any road machine,
farm tractor or implement of husbandry temporarily on a highway.
3. When you are at least eighteen years of age and have in your possession a valid
driver’s license equivalent to a Hawaii Class 1, 2 or 3 driver’s license issued to
you in any state of the United States, District of Columbia, The Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, a province of the
Dominion of Canada, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Compact foreign drivers’ licenses accompanied by an International Driving
Permit issued in the foreign jurisdiction are valid for one year after the date of 
entry into the USA.
4. When you are a non-resident at least twenty-one years of age and have in your
possession a valid commercial driver’s license issued to you in any state of the
United States, District of Columbia, a province of the Dominion of Canada, or
Mexico.
NOTE: Compact foreign drivers licenses accompanied by an International Driving
WHO CANNOT BE LICENSED
You cannot be licensed to operate a motor vehicle in Hawaii:
1. During the suspension period when your license has been suspended or
revoked by a court.
2. For a period of two years after you have been convicted of drunk driving while
unlicensed.
3. Unless you have successfully passed the required examination.
4. When you are required to but fail to comply with the financial responsibility
laws.
5. When the examiner of drivers has good cause to believe that you by reason of
physical or mental disability would not be able to operate a motor vehicle with
safety upon the highways.
6. When you are between 16 and 18 years of age without consent from the parent(s)
or guardian specified in legal custody documents.
7. When you are under 16 years of age.
8. When you are physically or mentally disqualified by law.
9. When you have outstanding traffic citations.
10
Permit issued in the foreign jurisdiction are valid for one year from the date of
arrival (your first port-of-entry) into the United States.
IDENTIFICATION AND LEGAL PRESENCE
The new driver license security requirements relating to identity and legal 
presence in this country began on March 5, 2012. Anyone applying for a new or renewed
driver's license will be required to provide an original or certified copy of documents 
proving the person's legal name, date of birth, legal presence in the U.S.A., social security
number, and two forms of proof of principal residence address in the State of Hawaii. 
Federal Law requires this evidence to be presented every 16 years or at every other renewal 
for a Real ID compliant license or at each renewal, if legal presence is temporary.
 
Names must be the same on all documents . If different, you must submit the
document that connects the name such as marriage certificate or court document.
Common examples of acceptable documents to establish Legal Name, Date of
Birth and Legal Presence are: birth certificate or valid U.S. passport, Social Security
Number: Social Security Card, Principal Residence in Hawaii (two documents are
required: each must include your name and principle residence address in Hawaii): a current
utility bill, telephone bill, bank statement or medical statement. The principal address
is the location where you currently reside even if the residence location is temporary.
 
More information about acceptable documents can be obtained at web site: 
http://HIDLDocs.com
Documents used to show principal residence address must include your name and 
principal residence address in Hawaii.
Drivers who choose not to provide a social security number or unable to provide 
one may obtain a limited purpose driver's license. This license will be valid for driving 
only. It will not be an acceptable identification document for federal purposes, such as 
boarding an airplane.
TYPES OF LICENSES
Instruction Permit – An instruction permit allows you to operate a motor vehicle when 
supervised by another driver who is at least 21 years of age and who is licensed to drive that 
type of vehicle. In all vehicles except motorcycles, the licensed driver must sit in the right 
front seat. You must be at least 15  years to be eligible for an instruction permit. If you are 
under age 18, refer to section Driving by Minors.
Provisional license – If you are under the age of 18, you must operate on a provisional 
license for at least 6 months before being eligible for a class 3 driver’s license. Refer to the 
section Driving by Minors.
11
.
Moped license (class 1) – You must have a class 1 license to operate a moped in Hawaii
highways. You must pass a special knowledge test and an off-street skills test. Refer to
the Motorcycle Operator Manual available at any driver licensing office.
Motorcycle license (class 2) - You must have a class 2 license to operate a motorcycle on
Hawaii highways. You must pass a special knowledge test and an off-street skills test.
Refer to the Motorcycle Operator Manual available at any driver licensing office.
12
HAWAII LICENSES
On successful completion of licensing procedures, you will be issued a driver’s
license similar to the following.
The license contains information including your driver license number, date of
birth, dates of issuance and expiration, physical characteristics such as hair color and
sex, class of license and endorsements indicating what type of vehicle the driver is
licensed to operate, and any license restriction, such as requirement for corrective
lenses.
The license also indicates if the driver is under 21 years old, a commercial driver
and if he or she has consented to be an organ donor or has an advance healthcare
directive.
12
1.  A vision test
2.  A knowledge test relating to rules of the road and traffic control devices
3.  A practical road test
The knowledge and road tests may be waived for class 1 through 3 license applicants 
if the applicant is at least 18 years old and possesses a valid driver’s license that 
was issued by another state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Com-
monwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, a province of the Dominion of 
Canada, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a country that has a 
reciprocal licensing agreement with Hawaii. Renewal applicants may be waived also.
OBTAINING A DRIVER’S LICENSE OR INSTRUCTION PERMIT
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATIONS
You will be given the following tests when you apply for a driver’s license or
instruction permit as required:
Limited Purpose license – If an applicant refuses or is unable to provide a social security 
number, the applicant will be eligible for issuance of a limited purpose instruction permit, 
limited purpose driver’s license or limited purpose provisional driver’s license upon 
meeting all other applicable requirements. This license is not acceptable for official
federal purposes, such as boarding an airplane. Neither does it establish eligibility for
employment, voter registration or public benefits. It is only a license to drive a motor
vehicle. See 286-104.5, HRS for more information.
Driver’s License (class 3) – To get a class 3 license, you must be at least 17 years old. If
under the age of 18, you must complete a graduated licensing program that will allow
you to develop your driving skills over time as you gain experience and maturity. Refer
to the section Driving by Minors.
Larger Class License – Other class licenses are required if you drive certain types of
vehicles. You must be at least 21 years old before applying for any of these licenses.
Each class or endorsement requires special tests. Refer to the section Category 4
License. Refer to the Hawaii Commercial Driver’s License manual to obtain a 
commercial driver’s license.
DRIVING BY MINORS
Information on Hawaii’s graduated licensing program is at 
hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/files/2013/01/Hawaii-Graduated-Licensing-Brochure.pdf
•
Persons younger than 18 years of age must provide written consent from their 
parent(s) or legal guardian unless married or emancipated.
•    The minimum age to acquire an instruction permit is 15 1/2 years.
• 
You must pass the preliminary examinations by taking a vision screening test 
and a rules of the road test.
• 
You may operate a motor vehicle upon any highway with an instruction permit 
only when accompanied by a licensed driver at least 21 years of age. If between 
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., you must be accompanied by your parent 
or guardian. 
• All occupants must use safety belts or child restraints.
• You must hold a valid instruction permit for a period of 180 days before 
applying for a provisional license.
• The minimum age to obtain a provisional license is 16 years.
• You must complete a State certified driver’s education course and possess the 
classroom and behind the wheel certificates.
• You must pass a road test.
• Your provisional license allows you to transport only one person under age 18 
who is not a household member.
13
Over 21 License
Under 21 License
•
With a provisional license, you may drive between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
only when accompanied by a licensed parent or guardian unless driving to and
from employment or driving to and from the driver’s school-authorized activity.
During these hours, you may not transport more than one person under 18 unless
accompanied by your parent or guardian.
•
All occupants must use safety belts or child restraints.
•
You must hold a provisional license for six months before applying for a driver’s
license.
•
The minimum age to obtain a driver’s license is 17 years.
DRIVER LICENSE CATEGORIES
Class
Type of Vehicle
1
2
3
Mopeds
Motorcycles and motorscooters.
Any single vehicle with a GVWR of 18,000 pounds or less, 
vehicles designed to transport 15 or fewer passengers, including the
driver, and autocycles. An autocycle is a motorcycle that has a 
steering wheel and seating that does not require the operator to 
straddle or sit astride on it and is designed to travel on three 
wheels in contact with the ground.
4
Any vehicle that is not a commercial motor vehicle.
A (CDL)
Any combination of vehicles with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or
more; GVWR of vehicles towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds.
B (CDL)
Any single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more, or if
the GVWR of the towed vehicle is not in excess of 10,000 pounds.
C (CDL)
Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that meets neither
the definition of A or B and designed to transport 16 or more pas-
sengers or used to haul hazardous materials requiring placards.
Endorsement
H (CDL)
Vehicles hauling hazardous materials in placardable amounts.
T (CDL)
Vehicles towing double and triple trailers.
P (CDL)
Vehicles designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the
driver.
N (CDL)
Tank vehicles.
X (CDL)
Tank vehicles hauling hazardous materials in placardable amounts.
S (CDL)
School bus
14
CDL endorsments and restrictions are listed on web page
www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/title491/section/383.153
DRIVER PERFORMANCE TEST
You must be accompanied to the testing station by a licensed driver and provide
a vehicle in safe operating condition with a current safety inspection certificate 
and insurance identification card. All vehicle safety defects must be corrected
prior to taking the test.
You will not be asked to violate any laws. No tricks will be used. Passengers are
not permitted during the tests.
Although you may drive an autocycle with a category 3 driver's license, you 
are not allowed to use an autocycle for the category 3 performance test.
MOTORCYCLE/MOTORSCOOTER/MOPED EXAMINATION
(CATEGORY 1 & 2)
You will be required to pass a special written examination for a motorcycle, 
motor scooter or moped. The test includes questions on rules of the road, highway 
signs and safe driving. Passing an off-road skills test is also required. Information 
about this is in the Motorcycle Operator Manual, which is available at any field 
office or at web site: http://hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/library/motor-vehicle-safety-
office/.
LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE TEST (CATEGORY 3 LICENSE)
The following test is administered for a Category 3 driver’s license (cars and
lightweight trucks (18,000 pounds GVWR or less) and buses designed to carry 15
or fewer occupants).
You will be required to satisfactorily demonstrate your ability to:
•
start your vehicle and drive through a business district
•
demonstrate parallel parking
•
demonstrate while driving, proper signaling, turning, starting and
stopping procedures.
•
be able to put your vehicle in motion on a slight grade without rolling
backwards
•
demonstrate your knowledge of and obedience to traffic laws and
ordinances and safe driving practices.
CATEGORY 4 LICENSE
LICENSE RENEWAL
You may renew your driver’s license at any driver licensing office in Hawaii.
Your license can be renewed within six months before the expiration date. EVERY
HAWAII STATE DRIVER’S LICENSE IS VOID AFTER THE EXPIRATION
DATE. THERE IS NO GRACE PERIOD. Your license may be renewed within a 
year after the expiration date. You must follow the procedure for an original license 
if you fail to renew your driver’s license during the renewal period. Before your 
license is renewed, you must pass a vision test. You may also be required to pass a 
road test. You may renew your license once by mail but must present yourself 
before the examiner of drivers every other renewal.
15
You will be required to pass the skills test (vehicle inspection test, basic control
skills test and road test) described in the Hawaii Commercial Driver’s License
Manual. Copies of this manual are available at any field office, or at web site
http://hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/library/motor-vehicle-safety-office/
DUPLICATE LICENSE
You may apply for a duplicate license whenever your license is lost, stolen or mutilated.
Proper identification is required upon application.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR NAME ON DRIVER’S LICENSE
Whenever you change your residence address you must, within 30 days, notify the county exam-
iner of drivers in writing of your old and new address, your name and driver’s license number.
A change of name requires that you appear in person at the office of the appropriate
examiner of drivers within 30 days with proof of the change.
RESTRICTED LICENSE
Driver licenses can be issued to individuals who have disabilities or reduced capability to
drive safely in all types of traffic conditions. This means that drivers who have experienced
medical problems such as major surgery, amputation, or serious illnesses do not necessarily
have to give up driving. Additionally, drivers who experience 
diminished reflexes or vision problems should know that it does not always result in the loss
of their driving privileges.
The driver’s licensing office can review a driver’s medical report provided by the dri-
ver’s health care provider and administer vision and skills tests that measure a driver’s
functional ability to safely operate a motor vehicle. Once this assessment has been com-
pleted, a license with restrictions may be issued which will permit the driver to continue
driving within the safe limits of the driver’s ability.
Only when it has been determined that a driver cannot operate a vehicle safely under any
condition, is the driver license withdrawn. Often no restrictions are required, but when they
are, one or more of the following conditions are specified on the driver license.
16
  
LICENSE	  RESTRICTIONS
CODE
DESCRIPTION
CODE
DESCRIPTION
B
CORRECTIVE	  LENSES	  MUST	  BE	  
WORN	  
P
NO	  PASSENGERS	  IN	  CMV	  BUS	  	  	  	  	  	  
C
MECHANICAL	  AID
V
MEDICAL	  VARIANCE	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
D
PROSTHETIC	  AID
W
FARM	  WAIVER
E
NO	  MANUAL	  TRANSMISSION	  
VEHICLE
X
NO	  CARGO	  IN	  CMV	  TANK	  VEHICLE	  	  
F
OUTSIDE	  MIRROR
Z
NO	  FULL	  AIR	  BRAKE	  EQUIPPED	  
CMV
G
LIMIT	  TO	  DAYLIGHT	  ONLY
2
FULL	  HAND	  EQUIPMENT
H
LIMITED	  TO	  EMPLOYMENT
3
MECHANICAL	  SIGNALS
I
LIMITED	  -­‐	  OTHER	  	  
4
POWER	  STEERING	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
J
OTHER
5
POWER	  BRAKES	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
K
INTRASTATE	  ONLY	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
STEERING	  KNOB	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
L
NO	  AIR	  BRAKE	  EQUIPPED	  CMV	  	  	  	  	  
7
CUSHION
M
NO	  CLASS	  A	  PASSENGER	  VEHICLE	  	  
8
MEDICAL
N
NO	  CLASS	  A/B	  PASSENGER	  
VEHICLE
9
THREE-­‐WHEEL	  MOTORCYCLE	  	  	  	  	  
O
NO	  TRACTOR-­‐TRAILER	  CMV	  	  	  	  
NATIONAL DRIVER’S REGISTRY SERVICE
 
Information on applicants for an original or renewed Hawaii driver’s license is for-
warded to the National Driver Register Program, Washington, D.C.  If the records of the 
NDR show that you have had a license suspended or revoked in another state or D.C., a 
Hawaii driver’s license will not be issued.
ORGAN DONOR PROGRAM
 
When you make an application for a Hawaii driver’s license or renewal, you may 
designate that you, pursuant to the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, are a donor of body 
organs or parts upon your death. Please tell your family about your wish to donate. 
Their permission to use organs will be requested.
ADVANCE HEALTH CARE DIRECTIVE
 
You may indicate that you have an advance health care directive. In the event of 
serious illness or an accident in which you cannot speak for yourself, the advance 
directive states your wishes for health care. Putting “AHCD” on your license will alert 
medical personnel that you have special instructions. Please tell your family and your 
OTHER IMPORTANT INFORMATION  
LICENSE DISPLAY
 
You must have a valid driver’s license with you at all times while operating a motor 
vehicle or moped and must show it on demand to a Police Officer.
TRAFFIC CITATIONS
 
A person charged with a violation of the Hawaii Vehicle Law will be issued a written 
traffic citation in most cases. Two types of traffic citations are: less serious “traffic infrac-
tion” and the serious “traffic crime.” The less serious traffic offenses will be subject to 
civil rather than criminal proceedings with such sanctions as fines and driver’s license and 
vehicle registration stoppers. People receiving traffic infraction citations may pay, write 
a statement, or appear in person. However, a person receiving traffic crime citations may 
face the possibility of jail and, therefore, court appearances are required.
 
If you have a question about your traffic citation, whether it is for a traffic crime 
or traffic infraction, call the number listed on the citation or the District Court on the 
island: Kauai 482-2355, Maui 244-2800, Hawaii 961-7470, Oahu 538-5500.
17
As of April 26, 2016, a veteran notation may be displayed for veterans of the Korean 
conflict and persons who served in the armed forces of the Republic of Korea, who 
fought under the command of the United Nations led by the United States, during the 
Korean conflict and are currently United States citizens.
DRIVER’S LICENSE FOR MOPEDS
 
A moped is a two- or three-wheeled device with a motor no larger than two horse-power.
 
You are required to have a driver’s license (any category) to operate a moped on 
the public streets and highways.
 
If you do not have a driver’s license, you may obtain a Category 1 license (mopeds) 
by following the procedure required for that license category and using you moped for 
any required performance test.
doctor that you have completed an advance health directive and give copies to them.
VETERAN STATUS
 
Beginning October 1, 2014, if desired by the license applicant, a notation of “veteran” 
may be placed on the front of the license of any person who served in any of the uniformed 
services of the United States and was discharged under conditions other than dishonorable.
CHAPTER II
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND INSPECTION
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
Every motor vehicle operated on the highways of the State shall be equipped with
brakes, steering, horn, door handles, tires, exhaust system, lights, glass, windshield
wipers, odometer, speedometer, bumpers, wheels, wheel lug nuts, fenders, floor pans, 
hood and hood catches, and gas tank meeting established standards.
ILLEGAL EQUIPMENT
The following motor vehicle equipment is prohibited:
1. A red light showing from the front, or a blue light visible outside of the vehicle,
except on authorized emergency vehicles;
2. A bell, exhaust whistle or siren, except on authorized emergency vehicles;
3. A muffler cut-out or by-pass, or a muffler that makes more noise than an origi-
nal equipment manufacturer muffler.
SAFETY INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
All motor vehicles operated on the public highways must have an official Periodic
Motor Vehicle Inspection (PMVI), at least once a year, except that ambulances must be
inspected once every six months, and new vehicles do not need to be inspected until two
years after their initial inspection on the date that they are first sold.
Many service stations and garages are authorized to conduct PMVIs, also known as
safety inspections; issue certificates of inspection; and affix stickers. A copy of the 
rules that regulate the inspection program can be viewed at web
A Hawaii state automobile insurance identification card is required to pass the
inspection. Upon approval, a sticker is affixed to the vehicle and an inspection 
certificate is issued to you. This must remain in the vehicle. The inspection results 
are sent electronically to the motor vehicle registration file.
site: http://hidot.hawaii.gov/dot/highways/home/doing-business/hawaii-administrative-rules/.
Click on Chapter 19-133.2.
18
Vehicles which have been modified, rebuilt or altered may be required to comply 
with county reconstructed vehicle inspection requirements. A bill of sale or receipt is 
required for all parts that have been added to the vehicle. The inspection will be con- 
RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLES
ducted by a qualified reconstruction inspector. Upon completion of the inspection, you
will be issued an emblem indicating compliance. Administrative rules 19-134 are at
http://hidot.hawaii.gov/highways/home/doing-business/hawaii-administrative-rules/.
Click on Chapter 19-134 (See inside back cover for inspection station location.)
 
VEHICLE CONDITION AND MAINTENANCE
You are responsible for the condition of the vehicle you are driving even though you 
may not be the owner of the vehicle. General care and maintenance should be per
formed regularly by you or by an experienced mechanic. The following information 
may help you to better understand important parts of your vehicle:
Brakes: If the brakes can’t stop your vehicle, you shouldn’t make it go. A common
brake test is to apply the brakes rather hard at a speed of 4 to 8 mph. The vehicle should
not pull to either side. Do this test in a place where you will not require others to do a
brake test too. If you have antilock brakes, go to an open area such as a deserted section of
a parking lot and try them out so you know what to expect in an emergency brake
application. You usually need to be going over 10 mph for them to activate. Also, it’s 
easier to activate ABS on a wet and slippery surface. Practice NOT pumping the
break pedal. more information about brakes go to: www.nhtsa.gov. Then search for
Directional Signals: Directional signals enable you to communicate with other 
drivers, so make sure they operate correctly. Any change in the dash light 
indication reflects improper operation. If the directional signals fail, use hand signals 
until you can have them repaired.
Brake Lamps: Brake or stop lamps warn other drivers that you are slowing or stop ping.
Check these lamps frequently to make sure they operate when the brakes are applied.
Horn: Every vehicle is required to be equipped with a horn in good working condi-
tion to give audible warning.
Head Lamps: The head lamps of your vehicle are of critical importance in night
driving, in rainy weather, in fog, and while driving through tunnels. They must work
properly and be correctly adjusted at all times.
Brakes.
Door Latches: Door latches and locks provide you with safety and security. Be sure
all doors latch and lock properly.
Exhaust System: The exhaust system carries exhaust gases to an exit point located
to reduce entry of fumes into the passenger compartment and reduces the noise to an
acceptable level. To prevent carbon monoxide poisoning, keep your exhaust system free
of leaks. Replace all defective parts immediately. Replacement mufflers must not allow
more noise than the original equipment manufacturer muffler.
Hood Latches: Front opening hoods are equipped with a primary latch and a sec-
ondary catch. They should operate properly so the hood will not open and block
your vision while you are driving.
Rear-View Mirrors: Rear-view mirrors should be adjusted to give you the maximum
view to the rear horizon. All mirrors should be maintained in a clean condition and be
firmly attached to the vehicle.
19
Windshield: The windshield should be free of cracks and breaks that interfere with
your vision. The windshield wipers should clean the windshield evenly, without leav-
ing streaks. Windshield washers enable you to clean the windshield while you are driv-
ing. Keep the reservoir filled and check the operation frequently.
Safety Belts: Safety belts help to keep you from being injured and can save your life.
Protect yourself, your passengers and others by using safety belts at all times while driv-
ing. All front seat occupants are required by law (291-11.6, HRS) to use seat belts.
Children under age 4 must be in a child restraint; persons age 4 through 17 must be belt-
ed in the rear seats. Air bags are supplemental occupant protection for a first impact. 
Since the bags deflate immediately occupants must rely on the belts for protection if 
subsequent impacts occur. If the air bags deploy, it is advisable to replace them so you 
will maintain a maximum of occupant protection.
20
 
 
 
 
-
Steering: Your steering wheel should be able to turn smoothly and easily from the 
maximum right position to the maximum left position and back again. There should be 
no more than two inches of free play in the steering wheel, if you have power steering 
(check with the motor running); or 3 inches, if you do not have power steering. Your 
vehicle should respond quickly to small movements of the steering wheel. The vehicle 
should not pull to either side, and the wheels should not “shimmy”.
Tires: Don’t take tires for granted. Check them at least once a month. Check the door 
jamb for the vehicle manufacturer’s recommended pressure and tire size. Proper pres-
sure extends tire life and improves handling. Replace tires that have less than 1/16 inch 
of  tire tread. An easy method of checking tire tread is to use a Lincoln penny. Place the 
penny upside down within the tread. If the top of Lincoln’s head is visible, the tire needs 
to be replaced.  Also, check tires for cuts, bulges, tread separation and uneven wear.
Check your spare tire too. If you notice a slight steering wheel vibration or an
unusual noise, check to see if you have a tire problem. You can get helpful tire informa-
tion at: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/problems/Equipment/Tires/index.html
Tail Lamps and Side Marker Lamps: Tail lamps and side marker lamps warn other
drivers of your presence. Check them periodically for proper operation.
21
CHAPTER III
VEHICLE REGISTRATION, OWNERSHIP DOCUMENTS
AND APPLICATION FOR TITLE
Hawaii law requires that the motor vehicle you operate on the public highways in
the State be REGISTERED IN THE COUNTY IN WHICH YOU OPERATE THE
VEHICLE. Similarly, Hawaii law requires that your vehicle must be licensed each
year by the county in which you operate the vehicle. Your vehicle must have a current
and valid safety inspection certificate before it can be registered. Proof of motor
vehicle insurance is required for cars, buses and trucks being inspected, while proof
of liability is required for motorcycles being inspected.
FIRST REGISTRATION
Registration of your vehicle provides an official record of its ownership. When
you first register a vehicle in Hawaii, it is subject to special requirements. Specifically,
your vehicle is subjected to inspection and weighing to properly record (a) its iden-
tification number, and (b) its weight.
MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND TITLE
Registrations and titles are issued by the appropriate agency in each county. (See
back cover for listing.) The Hawaii certificate of ownership of title is held by the legal
owner or the lien holder until the lien is satisfied (loan on vehicle is paid). The regis-
tration is issued to the purchaser who must keep the certificate in the vehicle. Motor
vehicle registrations are staggered and expire annually at the end of the 12th month.
RENEWAL APPLICATIONS
Registration renewal applications are mailed to your last recorded address. Any
errors you find on the application should be reported promptly to the appropriate
county agency.
RENEWAL BY MAIL
You can avoid waiting in line by mailing your application with a check or money
order for the exact amount shown on the application under “TOTAL FEE.” Mail to
your county agency within ten (10) working days prior to the end of the expiration
month. Return both parts of the renewal application. DO NOT DETACH THE
STUB.
RENEWAL ONLINE
You may renew your registration online if your vehicle is currently registered in
the City and County of Honolulu at www.co.honolulu.hi.us or the County of Maui at
www.mauicounty.gov/mvrenewal. Check their website for additional information.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR NAME ON THE MOTOR VEHICLE
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
Whenever the address of the registered owner of a motor vehicle is changed from
that stated on the application of the certificate of registration, the registered owner
must, within thirty (30) days after the change, notify the appropriate county agency,
A 100% medically disabled veteran with accompanying paperwork is exempt from 
paying registration fees.
If your vehicle was last registered and titled in another State and currently sub-
ject to Hawaii State registration, you must submit to the appropriate county agency
where you are stationed an application together with your vehicle’s out-of-state cer-
tificate of title and registration, your vehicle’s current Hawaii State certificate of
motor vehicle safety inspection, a vehicle shipping receipt and a verification of vehi-
cle identification serial number. In cases of a non-title state, you must present an appli-
cation together with your certificate of registration and one or more notarized bill(s)
of sale establishing a chain of ownership; a current Hawaii State vehicle safety inspec-
tion and a verification of vehicle serial number.
NEW VEHICLES PURCHASED IN HAWAII
When you purchase a new vehicle in the State of Hawaii, you must obtain an appli-
cation form countersigned by the licensed new car dealer certifying the sale of the
motor vehicle.
NEW VEHICLES PURCHASED IN ANOTHER JURISDICTION
The various States require different forms of ownership documents. Hawaii will
accept the manufacturer’s certificate of origin or a notarized bill of sale.
NEW VEHICLES PURCHASED IN A FOREIGN COUNTRY
When you purchase a vehicle in a foreign country, you must obtain a bill of sale
from the foreign dealer issued in your name. The vehicle must have manufacturer
USED VEHICLES PURCHASED IN A FOREIGN COUNTRY
When you purchase a used vehicle in a foreign country, you must have certificate
of registration and bill of sale as proof of ownership. See 286-42(a), HRS.
’ ’ ’ ’
’s
certification label indicating compliance with USA standards and a 17-character
Vehicle Identification Number (see 286-42(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes).
in writing of his old and new addresses, along with the vehicle license number, make,
and vehicle identification number.
Whenever the name of a registered owner of a motor vehicle is changed from that
shown on the application of the certificate of ownership, the registered owner, shall,
within thirty (30) days after the change, appear in person at the appropriate county
agency with proof of change of name, the certificate of ownership properly endorsed
and the current year’s certificate for such change of name in the records.
U.S. ARMED FORCES MEMBERS EXEMPTION
When you are a member of the U.S. Armed Forces, on duty at a military installa-
tion in the State of Hawaii, and are a legal resident of another State, you may register
your vehicle with that State and are exempt from the payment of the Hawaii Excise
Tax on motor vehicles brought into Hawaii.
22
USED VEHICLES PURCHASED IN ANOTHER JURISDICTION
When you purchase a vehicle in another jurisdiction (State), you must obtain from
the seller named on the out-of-state title, the certificate of title, certificate of registra-
tion and a notarized bill of sale. When the vehicle is purchased in a non-title State,
you must obtain from the seller the current certificate of registration or certification
of registration from the non-title State and notarized bills of sale, one from the seller
to you and one from the previous owner to the seller.
USED VEHICLES BROUGHT INTO THE STATE OF HAWAII FROM ANOTHER
STATE IN YOUR NAME
If your vehicle is registered in another State, you are entitled to apply for a permit
(temporary registration) which will allow you to operate your vehicle upon the public
streets and highways of Hawaii up to its expiration date. However, under no circum-
stances will a permit be issued to exceed a twelve-month period. Certificate of regis-
tration, shipping receipt, and current certificate of Hawaii State motor vehicle safety
inspection must be presented.
Upon expiration of the permit (temporary registration), except for members of the
U.S. Armed Forces, you must register your vehicle with the appropriate county
agency where you reside.
DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES
Motorcycles, trailers and semi-trailers must display a license plate on the rear; all
other vehicles must display a license plate on both the front and rear.
MOPED LICENSING
Mopeds are required to be registered and licensed as bicycles. The license tag or
decal must be displayed on the rear fender.
23
      Mopeds are required to be inspected, registered and licensed. The license plate and 
inspection sticker must be displayed on the rear of the moped.
24
CHAPTER IV
THE DRIVER
Any driving situation involves three basic elements: the environment (the highway 
and traffic), your vehicle, and the driver (you). Of these three elements, only you as a 
driver can gather information about the existing situation; apply your skill, 
knowledge, experience and judgment; and take the action required to safely 
complete the driving task. While good judgment can help to compensate for lower levels 
of skill, knowledge or experience, poor judgment can nullify any degree of expertness 
in these areas. Your judgment is primarily influenced by your attitude when you drive.
EMOTIONAL ASPECTS OF DRIVING
If you are worried, distracted, or if your mind is preoccupied, you cannot count on
being sufficiently alert to drive safely. Troubles from home, quarrels, misunderstand-
ings, financial worries, serious illness in the family, personal fears, or overconfidence
can make you temporarily accident-prone. Strong emotions can work the same way.
Persons who have just had violent arguments, or who are angry or in grief, need some
time for “cooling off” or for making an adjustment before they drive a car. Taking out
your frustrations or anger while driving on the streets or highways is exercising very
poor judgment and can  prove to be an expensive way to expend emotions. Worry and
safe driving do not mix. If worried, ill, nervous, frightened, angry or depressed, let
someone else drive. 
As a well-adjusted person, you are more likely to be a good driver. You must
always act not merely from your personal point of view, but with consideration and
courtesy to other users of the streets and highways.
Remember, each person possesses a certain amount of power when behind the
wheel, because full control of the vehicle is in the hands of the driver. Your attitude at
the time you get behind the wheel and the use of this power tends to reveal the type
of individual you are. Are you a bully, a thoughtless lawbreaker, a self-centered lane
stealer? Are you a reliable, courteous, psychologically and emotionally mature person,
prepared to share the road in the interest of traffic safety?
MEDICAL ASPECTS OF DRIVING
Your physical condition has an important bearing on your ability to drive safely.
Alcohol, drugs, illness or disability are factors which may cause or contribute to a
traffic crash.
DRIVER AGE AND ACCIDENTS
One of the most significant statistics that results from motor vehicle accident data
is that of the relationship of the driver’s age to the number of accidents in which the
driver is involved. These statistics show that the youngest drivers (under age 20) have
about twice as many accidents as would be expected for the number of drivers in this
group. As driver age increases they continue to have fewer accidents until about 50 
 to 54 years of age. These drivers have the least number of acciden ts of any age group.
Starting at age 55 accidents occur more frequently as age increases. Drivers above age
75 are involved in an increased number of accidents, but still fewer than those 
drivers under the age of 25.
PROBLEMS OF THE YOUNGER DRIVER
Young adults have a desire for acceptance and recognition of their capabilities by
others. As drivers they sometimes find it necessary to demonstrate these capabilities.
Quite often their demonstrations are carried to lengths that exceed the capabilities of
the vehicle, the road, and those of the most experienced and skillful drivers.
Frequently such activity serves only to prove the younger drivers’ lack of ability and
results in disaster. You can avoid being “trapped” in this kind of a situation by:
1. Resisting the desire to exhibit and compete. Such activity only serves as an
indication of your inexperience and immaturity.
2. Declining all challenges to prove your or your vehicle’s capabilities. Such
refusal is adequate proof of your maturity and responsibility.
PROBLEMS OF THE OLDER DRIVER
Increased driving experience most often leads to increased driving skill and capa-
bility. Statistics show that drivers become safer as they add experience through the
years up to a point. Eventually the aging process will result in:
1. Reduced hearing and eyesight capabilities;
2. A reduction in physical dexterity and an increase in reaction time;
3. Increased decision time in driving situations; and
4. Decreased attention span and ability to concentrate on the driving task.
Older drivers very often do not recognize the gradual decrease in their capability
to cope with the driving situation and become increasingly dangerous to themselves
and others.
All drivers, including older experienced drivers should:
1. Keep physically fit;
2. Have annual physical examinations;
3. Know the effect of medication on their driving ability;
4. Recognize and drive within their limitations; and
5. Seek and comply with a physician’s advice concerning their driving capabilities.
25
26
CHAPTER V
TRAFFIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL
You are required to obey all traffic laws when driving a vehicle upon a street or
highway.
POLICE OFFICERS
You must obey all lawful orders and directions of a police officer.
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND MARKINGS
You must operate your vehicle as indicated by traffic signs, signals and pavement
markings.
DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY
You must drive on the right half of the roadway. Vehicles going in opposite direc-
tions must pass each other on the right. On narrow roads you must allow vehicles going
in the opposite direction at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the road.
When moving slower than other traffic you should drive in the extreme right lane.
DRIVING ON THE LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY
You may drive on the left half of the roadway when:
•
Overtaking and passing a vehicle going in the same direction on a road that has
two or three lanes of moving traffic and there is no traffic coming from the
opposite direction.
•
There is an obstruction in the roadway and oncoming vehicles are not using the
left half of the road.
•
Driving on a one-way street or road.
You MUST NOT drive on the left half of the roadway when:
•
The road has four or more lanes for moving traffic unless otherwise directed by
signs.
•
Approaching the top of a hill or on a curve.
•
Approaching within 100 feet (30.5m) of or passing through an intersection or
railroad crossing.
•
Approaching within 100 feet (30.5m) of a bridge or tunnel and you are unable
to see vehicles coming from the opposite direction.
PASSING ON THE RIGHT
You may pass to the right of another vehicle:
•
When the vehicle you are passing is about to make a left turn, but you may not drive
your vehicle off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway to pass.
•
On a paved street or highway with two or more lanes marked for traffic in each
direction.
•
On a one-way street with two or more lanes marked for traffic.
ONE-WAY ROADWAYS
You must drive only in the direction indicated by the posted traffic signs.
DRIVING ON ROADWAYS MARKED WITH TRAFFIC LANES
When the street or road is marked with traffic lanes you must:
•
Drive entirely within the marked lane and do not change lanes until you have
checked that the change can be made safely.
•
Drive in the proper lane as indicated by signs or pavement markings.
27
FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY
When following another vehicle, you must:
•
Not follow closer than is reasonable and prudent for the speed, traffic, road and
weather conditions. See page 67, Chapter X.
•
When towing another vehicle, leave enough space ahead of your vehicle to
allow an overtaking vehicle to occupy the space safely.
DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS
When a highway is divided by a barrier or an unpaved space, you must not drive
across or through the barrier or space except where an opening or paved surface is pro-
vided and signs do not prohibit it.
REQUIRED SIGNALS
When slowing down, turning or changing lanes, you must signal to let others know
what you plan to do.
•
You must signal every time, even when there are no other vehicles in sight.
•
Signals must be given for at least 100 feet (30.5m) before you change lanes,
turn or stop. This is about five car lengths. It is advisable to signal for a greater
distance when driving at higher speeds.
•
Hand signals must be used when the vehicle turn signals are not operating.
•
Signaling does not give you the right to make the indicted maneuver; you must
check to ensure that it can be safely completed without interfering with other
traffic.
•
Do not rest your foot on the brake pedal when you are not braking to avoid giv-
ing following drivers a false stop lamp signal.
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
You must stop your vehicle not less than 15 feet (4.6m) from the nearest rail when:
•
An installed electric or mechanical signal is giving warning of an approaching
train;
•
A crossing gate is lowered, or a flagman is signaling the approach of a train;
•
A train approaching within 1,500 feet (460m) gives audible warning of its
approach; or
•
When the approaching train is visible and so close as to constitute a hazard.
LEFT TURN 
RIGHT TURN
SLOW DOWN OR STOP
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Excessive speed for conditions is the major cause of most accidents.
Basic Law: You must not drive at a speed that is greater than is reasonable and
prudent.
You must drive at a safe appropriate speed depending on the area in which you are
driving, the type and condition of the road traffic, the presence of pedestrians, the
weather, and light conditions.
Speed Limits:
•
You must not drive at a speed that is greater than the posted maximum limit.
•
You must not drive at a speed that is less than the posted minimum speed limit.
•
You must not drive so slowly that you hold back other traffic. If you cannot
keep up with traffic, pull off the roadway and let other traffic pass or change to
another route.
•
You must not engage in any race, speed contest or speed exhibition of any kind
on a public street or highway.
Speed limits are indicated by posted signs. Reduced speed limits are required in
the following areas:
•
On streets near schools and playgrounds and at locations marked with a
“School Crossing” sign when children are present.
•
On streets in residential or business areas.
PARKING
Many times, it is difficult to find a parking place. When parking your vehicle, you
should be considerate of others. Parking in a prohibited place can be an inconvenient
and costly experience. Parking is prohibited in the following locations:
•
At any place where your vehicle is hazardous to other traffic on the roadway;
your vehicle will be towed away.
•
On a sidewalk or sidewalk area.
•
In front of or so close to a public or private driveway that your vehicle inter-
feres with the use of the driveway.
•
Within or so close to an intersection that your vehicle interferes with traffic.
•
In front of or so close to a fire hydrant that your vehicle could interfere with the
use of the hydrant.
•
On or so close to a crosswalk that your vehicle blocks other drivers’ view of
pedestrians.
•
At any place during the times when official signs or markings prohibit stand-
ing or parking.
•
On a bridge, elevated structure, or within a tunnel.
•
On the roadway side of another car stopped at the edge of the road (double
parking) whether you remain in the vehicle or not.
•
More than 12 inches (30cm) from the curb.
•
In a passenger or freight loading zone.
•
At any place where less than 10 feet (3m) of the width of the street remains for
the free movement of traffic.
•
On any public road to repair (except emergency), wash, or display any vehicle
for sale.
28
                              If you drive more slowly than traffic on a multilane road, drive in 
      the right-hand lane so others can pass you on your left side.
•
When your vehicle extends outside of a marked parking space except when
your vehicle is larger than the marked space.
•
On a public street or highway for a continuous period of more than 24 hours.
•
In a space identified by the international symbol for accessibility,
unless you display the placard or license plate issued to the 
disabled person being transported in the vehicle.
TOW-AWAY ZONES
You must not park or stop your vehicle, even momentarily except when blocked
by other traffic, at any place during the hours stated on official signs which indicate
that a tow-away regulation is in effect. The police will have your vehicle towed away.
If your vehicle is towed away, contact the police for recovery information.
INTERFERENCE WITH DRIVER
Driving with more than three persons in the front seat of your vehicle may consti-
tute interference with the driver. Such interference is prohibited.
UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE
When you leave your vehicle unattended, you must:
•
Stop the engine;
•
Lock the ignition and remove the ignition key;
•
Set the parking brake; and
•
When the vehicle is on a grade, turn the wheels toward the curb.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
When you hear the warning signal (siren, bell or horn) or see the warning lamps
(flashing red or blue) of an emergency vehicle, you must provide a clear path for the
emergency vehicle and STOP. DON’T PANIC AND JAM ON THE BRAKES. The
following steps indicate the procedure:
•
Reduce your speed.
•
Determine the location and direction of the emergency vehicle.
•
Move your vehicle out of the path of the emergency vehicle.
•
If the emergency vehicle is directly behind your vehicle when you are in heavy
traffic, keep moving slowly until you can get out of the way.
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND CONVOYS
Funeral processions and convoys have the right of way at intersections. Vehicles in
a convoy or procession will usually use headlamps for identification. The first and last
vehicles will usually have a distinctive marking. You should not drive your vehicle
between the vehicles in a funeral procession.
29
Parking in a prohibited place can be an inconvenient and costly 
experience. Parking is prohibited in the following locations:
•
In an access aisle next to an accessible parking space. The access aisle must be
kept clear to allow for the deployment of a wheelchair lift/ramp and other 
mobility assistance devices. 
•
If you approach a stopped emergency vehicle with its lights flashing, slow down 
or stop as appropriate for the situation, move away so there is an empty traffic 
lane separating you and the emergency vehicle, if possible and safe to do so. 
See 291C-27, HRS for penalties.
NO PASSING RULES
The following diagrams illustrate the basic no passing situations you will
encounter while driving. In the illustrations below the red vehicle must not pass.
DO NOT PASS UNDER THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS:
1. On the right shoulder of the highway.
2. On approaching a hill or curve where
there is not 700 to 1000 feet (213m to
305m) clear distance ahead.
3. When the pass cannot be completed
without interfering with the safety of
the oncoming vehicle and before yel-
low line appears in your traffic lane.
Note: When you are being passed, it is
unlawful to increase your speed.
30
SHOULDER
HILL
ONCOMING CAR
SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM
This highly reflective 18 inch (46cm) triangular emblem is
required to be displayed on the rear of vehicles designed to
operate at speeds of 25 mph (40 km/h) or less. When you see
this emblem, reduce speed and approach cautiously.
4. When there is a solid yellow line in
your lane. (Look for the yellow “NO
PASSING ZONE” sign on the left side
of the road ahead.)
5. When there is a school bus on the same
roadway when the flashing lights are
operating.
6. When approaching within 100 feet
(30m) of or when traversing any inter-
section or railroad crossing, approach-
ing within 100 feet (30m) of any post-
ed narrow bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
Note: The end of a “no passing zone” does
not mean it is safe to pass. It means
there is increased visibility ahead.
31
CURVE
SCHOOL BUS
INTERSECTION
THE RULES OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
The following diagrams illustrate the basic right-of-way rules you will encounter
at intersections. In the illustrations below the red vehicle must always yield the right-
of-way.
32
Yield to the car on the right when
vehicles approach at the same time.
Yield to all traffic on the protected
route.
Yield to pedestrians and cars caught
in intersection when light turns green.
Yield to all oncoming traffic that is
so close as to be a hazard when turning
left.
Stop and yield to all traffic on the
protected route.
Stop and yield when entering any
public street or road from alley, drive-
way or farmyard.
CHAPTER VI
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
Traffic flow is controlled by the use of pavement markings, traffic islands, signals
and signs. These devices inform you of conditions concerning the roadway and help
guide you safely to your destination.
There are three categories of traffic control devices:
Regulatory Devices instruct you to stop, proceed in a certain direction, or limit
your speed. All regulatory devices indicate action required by you. Failure to comply
is subject to penalty.
Warning Devices advise you of hazardous conditions or the possibility of haz-
ardous conditions. For your own safety, obey warning devices. Disregarding the infor-
mation given by a warning device may result in an accident due to your negligence.
Guide and Information Signs assist you in finding your way safely or provide
information to make your trip more comfortable.
PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Pavement markings are lines, words or figures marked on the pavement with paint,
reflectors or other markers.
Centerlines:
Yellow centerlines are used to separate traffic moving in opposite directions.
Single Broken Yellow Lines are used
to mark the centerline when there are
only two lanes of traffic. You must drive
to the right of this centerline but when it
is safe you may cross this line to pass
another vehicle.
Double Solid Yellow Lines are used to
mark the center of the roadway where
passing is prohibited in both directions.
You may cross these lines ONLY TO
MAKE A LEFT TURN INTO OR
FROM AN ALLEY, PRIVATE ROAD
OR DRIVEWAY.
No Passing Lines are single solid yel-
low lines used on two-lane roads to indi-
cate zones where passing is prohibited.
You may cross the line ONLY to make a
left turn into or from an alley, private
road or a driveway.
33
34
Lane Markings:
White lines separate lanes of traffic moving in the same direction. You are required
to drive between these lane lines.
Single Dashed White Lane Lines may
be crossed when you can do so safely.
Single Solid White Lines indicate that movement from lane to lane is hazardous.
The wider the line, the greater the hazard. You may cross a solid white line ONLY IN
UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND THEN ONLY WITH GREAT CARE.
35
Double Solid White Lines indicate that movement from lane to lane is prohibited.
You MUST NOT CROSS A DOUBLE SOLID WHITE LINE.
Red Pavement Markings or reflectors
indicate a roadway that must not be
entered or used.
Edgelines are solid white or yellow
lines along the edge of the roadway to be
used as a safety guide. White lines are
used along the right edge of the roadway
and yellow edge lines may be along the
left edge of the roadway on divided
streets and highways.
36
Stop Lines are solid white lines
painted across the traffic lanes at 
intersections and pedestrian cross-
walks indicating the exact place at
which to stop.
Crosswalk Lines show pedestrians
where to safely cross the road or
street, and they supplement signs to
warn drivers of the possibility that
pedestrians may be crossing at a 
specific 
location. 
YOU 
MUST 
STOP FOR PEDESTRIANS IN
CROSSWALKS.
Two-Way Left Turn Channelization Markings are a combination of a yellow solid
and dashed lines in the center of a roadway which mark a lane in the center of the
roadway which may be used by vehicles travelling in either direction for left turn
maneuvers ONLY. The lane must NEVER be used for passing.
37
Obstruction Markings are solid lines painted in the traffic lanes to guide you
around obstructions, such as bridge supports, in the road. The markings may be yel-
low or white. You may pass to either side of white obstruction markings but you must
pass only to the right of the yellow markings.
Directional Markings are white arrows or words painted in the traffic lane to indi-
cate the direction in which you must go. You must move ONLY IN THE DIRECTION
INDICATED BY THE ARROW. Where arrows indicate more than one direction, you
may choose any direction indicated.
38
Railroad Crossing Markings are white markings painted in the traffic lane before
railroad crossings. The pavement is marked with a large “X” and two “R’s”. A solid
yellow centerline extends the entire distance to prevent passing, and a white stop line
is painted across the traffic lane.
Traffic Island Markings are of many different designs. They may be only painted
markings on the roadway or any combination of curbing, paving or landscaped
areas. Traffic islands are used to direct you into separate traffic lanes. Traffic islands
are called “Safety Islands” when they are used to protect pedestrians who may have
to stand in the roadway. YOU SHOULD NEVER DRIVE INTO OR ACROSS A
TRAFFIC ISLAND.
TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Traffic signals serve primarily to direct and regulate traffic. They are used at inter-
sections and other locations where it is necessary to interrupt the flow of traffic.
Standard Three-Color Signals:
These signals are used primarily to stop and permit movement of traffic at loca-
tions where there is considerable conflict in the movement of vehicles.
A Red Light means that you must stop:
1. At the stop line; or
2. When there is no stop line, before entering any cross-
walk, or
3. When there is no stop line or crosswalk before enter-
ing the intersection; and
4. Remain stopped until the signal changes to green.
After stopping, you may turn right except when a
sign prohibits such movement. You must yield to all
pedestrians and all vehicles when making such a turn.
After stopping you may also turn left on a red light
from a one-way street into a one-way street where traf-
fic is moving to the left, except when a sign prohibits
such movement.
A Yellow Light means that the red light is going to be
shown immediately thereafter. You should avoid enter-
ing the intersection when the yellow light is shown.
YOU MUST NOT ENTER THE INTERSECTION
AFTER THE RED LIGHT IS SHOWN.
39
A Green Light means go straight ahead or turn except
when signs prohibit turns. You must yield to all pedes-
trians and vehicles already in the intersection.
Lighted Arrows
Lighted arrows are sometimes used to control turns from a specific traffic lane.
A Red Arrow has the same meaning as a red light for
the indicated lane of traffic.
A Yellow Arrow has the same meaning as a yellow
light for the indicated lane of traffic.
A Green Arrow has the same meaning as a green light
for the indicated lane of traffic BUT YOU MUST TURN
OR PROCEED IN THE DIRECTION INDICATED BY
THE ARROW.
40
Combination Signals
Arrow signals combined with standard signals control the movement of vehicles in
all traffic lanes.
The colored lights and arrows have the same meanings
as indicated previously for signal lights and arrows. YOU
MUST MOVE ONLY IN THE DIRECTION INDICAT-
ED BY THE GREEN ARROW WHEN IT IS LIGHTED.
Flashing Signals
Flashing signals are sometimes used to warn you of danger.
A Red Flashing Signal has the same meaning as a
stop sign. A stop sign will also be posted where this sig-
nal is located.
A Yellow Flashing Signal means that you may pro-
ceed only with caution.
When regular traffic signals show flashing lights they have the same meanings as
described for the flashing red or yellow signals.
Lane Control Signals
Sometimes it is desirable to have traffic in a lane in one direction at certain times
and the opposite direction at other times. Lane control signals are used to control the
direction of traffic movement in the lane. The signal is placed over the traffic lane it
controls.
The Red “X” means you must not use that lane
because the lane is being used by traffic proceeding in the
opposite direction.
41
42
The Green Arrow means you may use that lane.
The Yellow “X” means that you must move out of
that lane of traffic because it is going to be used for traf-
fic moving in the opposite direction. When the Yellow
“X” signal is flashing you may use that lane only when
preparing to turn left.
Pedestrian Signals
Pedestrian signals are special types of traffic signals used only to control pedestri-
an movements. These signals consist of the lighted words “WALK” and “DON’T
WALK” and the symbols of a walking person and an upraised palm.
DON’T WALK or upraised palm symbol. A steady sig-
nal means that pedestrians must not enter the roadway
toward the signal. A flashing “DON’T WALK” or up-
raised palm signal means that pedestrians may not start to
cross the roadway but those already crossing may con-
tinue to the nearest sidewalk, traffic island or safety zone.
WALK or walking person symbol. A steady signal
means that pedestrians may cross the roadway towards
the signal. A flashing “WALK” or walking person sig-
nal is sometimes used to indicate that there is a possible
conflict between pedestrians and vehicles.
43
TRAFFIC SIGNS
Traffic signs provide you with information on actions you must take; warn you of
possible hazards and dangers; and provide you with route and location identification.
The meaning of traffic signs is indicated by color and shape in addition to words,
letters, numbers and silhouettes.
Colors and Shapes
The Color Red indicates that an action is prohibited. The color red appears on signs
of various shapes.
The Color Yellow indicates a warning of hazardous or dangerous conditions. This
color almost always appears on a diamond shaped sign.
The Color Orange indicates a warning concerning road work. This color appears
on rectangular or diamond shaped signs.
The Colors Black and White indicate a required action. Black and white signs are
always rectangular in shape.
The Colors Green, Blue and Brown are used on guide and information signs. These
colors appear mostly on rectangular shaped signs.
Regulatory Signs
A STOP SIGN is an 8-sided white on red sign indi-
cating that other traffic has the right-of-way. You must
always bring your vehicle to a complete stop and yield
to approaching traffic before proceeding. The stop
must be made at the “stop line”. If there is no “stop
line”, you must stop before crossing any marked or
unmarked crosswalk. When you cannot see other traf-
fic from the first stop, move ahead slowly and stop
again where you can see approaching traffic.
A YIELD SIGN is a triangular red and white sign
indicating that other traffic has the right-of-way. Be
ready to stop when you approach a “YIELD SIGN”.
You need to stop only when there is other traffic that has
the right-of-way.
SPEED LIMIT SIGNS are rectangular black and
white signs which are used to show the established max-
imum and minimum speed limits. These signs may indi-
cate special speed limits which apply at certain times, or
under certain conditions, or to certain kinds of vehicles.
YOU MUST NOT DRIVE FASTER THAN THE
POSTED MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT NOR SLOWER
THAN THE POSTED MINIMUM SPEED LIMIT.
44
REDUCED SPEED AHEAD SIGNS are the same color and shape as speed limit
signs and give you advance notice to slow your vehicle to a lower speed limit posted
ahead. These signs inform you that you should begin to reduce your speed. The new
speed limit begins at the next speed limit sign.
LANE USE CONTROL SIGNS are rectangular, black
and white signs indicating that turning movements are
required or the unusual turning movements are permit-
ted from specific lanes at an intersection. You must
move your vehicle only in the direction indicated for
your traffic lane.
DO NOT PASS SIGNS are rectangular signs indi-
cating locations where you must not pass on two- or
three-lane roads. YOU MUST NOT PASS ANOTHER
VEHICLE WHERE THESE SIGNS ARE POSTED.
NO PASSING ZONE SIGNS are pennant-shaped yel-
low and black signs that supplement the “Do Not Pass”
signs. The pennant is located at the left side of the road
and points to the beginning of the no-passing zone.
45
46
PASS WITH CARE SIGNS are rectangular, black and
white signs indicating the end of a no-passing zone.
OTHER ALIGNMENT SIGNS are rectangular,
black and white signs indicating where you must drive
to permit traffic to move safely and smoothly.
EXCLUSION SIGNS are rectangular signs and contain either a red circle on a white
background or a red circle with a red diagonal on a black and white background.
These signs restrict or prohibit vehicles or vehicle movements or prohibit some other
activity.
47
OTHER REGULATORY SIGNS. There are many other regulatory signs; all are 
rectangular with black or red lettering on a white background. These signs restrict
people, vehicles, weights and types of vehicles, parking, etc.
WARNING SIGNS
These signs warn you of dangers that exist or may be found on or near the road.
You should be prepared to take safe and proper action when you see these signs.
Warning signs are usually diamond-shaped with a black legend and border on a yel-
low background.
Divided Highway
Divided Highway Ends
Hill
Slippery When Wet
Pedestrian Crossing
Lane Ends or
Road Narrows
48
Traffic Signal Ahead
GUIDE AND INFORMATION SIGNS
These signs include all signs containing information for you regarding your loca-
tion and the location of places and services. Typical signs are: route markers, location
and distance signs, park signs, recreation signs, and service information signs.
This sign can mean either
School Crossing or School Zone
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE DEVICES
Various traffic control devices are used in construction and maintenance work
areas to direct drivers or pedestrians safely through the work zone and to provide for
the safety of the highway workers.
The most commonly used traffic control devices are signs, barricades, drums,
cones, tubes, flashing arrow panels and flagpersons. Orange is the basic color for these
devices.
Construction and Maintenance Signs:
Construction and maintenance signs are used to notify drivers of unusual or poten-
tially dangerous conditions in or near work areas. Most signs in work areas are dia-
mond shaped. A few signs are rectangular.
49
Channelizing Devices:
Barricades, vertical panels, drums, cones and tubes are the most commonly used
devices to alert drivers of unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in highway and
street work areas and to guide drivers safely through the work zone. At night they are
often equipped with flashing or steady burn lights.
The diagonal stripes on the barricade or vertical panel guide the driver towards the
direction to which traffic is to pass. Stripes sloping downward to the right mean the
driver should bear to the right. Conversely, stripes sloping downward to the left mean
bear to the left. 
50
Flashing Arrow Panels:
Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels may be used in work zones both day
and night to guide drivers into certain traffic lanes and to inform them that the part of
the road or street ahead of them is closed.
Flagpersons:
Flagpersons are often provided in highway and street work zones to stop, slow or
guide traffic safely through the areas. Flagpersons wear orange vests, shirts or jackets
and use red flags or stop/slow paddles to direct traffic through work zones.
51
CHAPTER VII
ACCIDENT PROCEDURES
What you must do if you are involved in an accident.
Traffic accidents resulting in personal injury to any extent, or death, or property
damage of $3,000 or more must be reported to the police immediately by the quick-
est means of communication.
If involved in an accident:
1. Stop immediately. If possible move your vehicle off the travelled portion of the
roadway. Do not leave the scene of an accident without identifying yourself and
rendering assistance.
2. Help the injured.
a. Call the nearest police agency. Ask for an ambulance if needed.
b. Act promptly, but carefully. Do not move the injured unnecessarily.
Unskilled handling can make serious injuries out of minor ones. Keep the
injured warm until skilled help arrives. If there is severe bleeding, attempt
to stop the flow of blood with direct pressure. Protect the victim from the
oncoming traffic.
3. Warn passing traffic. Have someone warn approaching cars to prevent further
damage from oncoming traffic. Keep a flashlight and flares in your vehicle for
emergency use.
4. Exchange information. Drivers must give their name, address, and vehicle reg-
istration number, and if requested, exhibit their driver’s license to any person
injured in the accident or to the driver or occupant of or person attending any
vehicle or other property damaged in the accident.
5. Upon striking an unattended vehicle, stop and locate the owner, or leave a writ-
ten notice containing your name and address and circumstances of the accident.
If you damage other property along the highway, notify the owner.
52
53
CHAPTER VIII
MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY RESPONSIBILITY LAW
WHOM DOES IT AFFECT?
All drivers involved in traffic accidents resulting in death, injury or property dam-
age in excess of $3,000, and all persons convicted by court of certain offenses involv-
ing vehicles.
WHAT MUST YOU DO AFTER THE ACCIDENT? (See Chapter VII, page 52)
Report the accident to the Police Department and insurance company and:
File evidence of insurance (Form SR-21).
WHAT MUST YOU DO UPON CONVICTION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
INVOLVING VEHICLES?
File and maintain proof of financial responsibility for a period of three (3) years
from conviction date;
File evidence of insurance (Form SR-22).
WHAT IS THE PENALTY FOR NON-COMPLIANCE?
Driver’s license will be suspended.
MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE LAW
WHO NEEDS MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE?
Every owner of a car, bus or truck must have motor vehicle insurance in order to
register or operate a vehicle in the State.
WHAT ARE THE MINIMUM MANDATORY COVERAGES?
The basic benefits include up to $10,000 per person for:
Medical and rehabilitative expenses;
It includes liability coverage of $20,000 per person with an aggregate limit of
$40,000 per accident for bodily injury and $10,000 for property damage per
accident. (NOTE: Damage to your own car will not be covered unless you have
additional insurance coverage.)
WHEN CAN I SUE OR BE SUED?
You can sue or be sued for recovery of property damage at any time but not for
bodily injury unless:
Medical bills exceed $5,000; or
Injury is such that the use of a part or function of the body is lost or permanent
and serious disfigurement results; or
Injury results in death.
WHAT IS THE PENALTY?
Any person who violates any applicable provision of the motor vehicle insurance
law will be subject to citation for such violation and each violation shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $5,000 or thirty (30) days
imprisonment, or suspension of motor vehicle operator’s license, or forfeiture of
motor vehicle certificate of registration, or any combination of such penalties.
54
55
CHAPTER IX
ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUGS
THE PROBLEM:
One of the most significant problems in driving is the great number of drivers who
are under the influence of alcohol. The use of alcohol is a factor in over 18,000 (about
40%) of the fatal motor vehicle accidents that occur every year in the United States.
This is your problem as a driver, whether you drink or not.
THE SOLUTION:
A large share of the responsibility for solving the problem rests with you, the driver.
•
You must understand what alcohol and other drugs do to you;
•
You must know your limits and not exceed them; and
•
You must refrain from driving when you have ingested an intoxicant.
ALCOHOL:
There are several things you should remember about alcohol:
•
Alcohol is a depressant, not a stimulant. It slows normal reflexes, interferes with
judgment, reduces alertness and impairs vision. If you feel stimulated after
drinking, it is simply because your inhibitions are lowered, causing loss of
caution and self-control.
•
It doesn’t matter whether you drink beer, wine, whiskey or any other alcoholic
beverage; it’s the amount of alcohol that enters your blood that causes the
problem.
•
Alcohol can affect you differently at different times. A small amount on an
empty stomach will affect you more rapidly than it would if you had recently
eaten a meal.
•
Once the alcohol enters your blood there is nothing you can do to lessen the
effect. Black coffee, food or a cold shower might wake you up, but they will
not sober you up. Alcohol is burned up by your liver and eliminated from your
body through your kidneys and lungs. This process takes time.
THE LAW
Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants. Driving a
motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants is prohibited in Hawaii.
Implied Consent. Any person who operates a motor vehicle on the public highways
in Hawaii is deemed to have given his or her consent to be tested to determine the
amount of alcohol in his or her blood.
Administrative License Revocation. Your license will be taken away and you will
be given a 30-day temporary driving permit if a test shows that you have a blood alco-
hol content of .08 or more or if you refuse the test. Anyone whose license is revoked
may request a hearing.
The problem is not limited to alcoholics who drive drunk. It includes anyone who 
drives after consuming alcohol, even if it is contained in medicine. Since alcohol 
and other drugs can have an adverse effect on judgement, people who consume 
these substances can easily misjudge their level of intoxication. People who drive 
even when slightly intoxicated are prone to serious mistakes that can result in 
devastating consequences.
Zero Tolerance. Drivers under 21 are prohibited from operating a motor vehicle
with a blood alcohol content level of .02 or more.
A police officer who believes a driver is under the influence of alcohol, may
request the driver to take a test. Refusal to take the test may result in the revocation of
your license for one year, two years or four years depending upon the driver’s prior
alcohol enforcement contacts. In addition, the driver may be charged with driving
under the influence of alcohol even though he refuses the test. The test can also prove
that you are not under the influence of alcohol.
When the test shows alcohol in the driver’s blood, the driver may be considered to
be:
•
Impaired if the blood alcohol content is more than .05 percent but less than .08
percent.
•
Under the influence of alcohol if the blood alcohol content is .08 percent or
more.
IT IS AGAINST THE LAW TO CONSUME OR POSSESS ANY ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE ON ANY PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR ANY PUBLIC SIDEWALK.
Storing an opened alcoholic beverage container in the area of a motor vehicle nor-
mally occupied by the driver or passengers is prohibited on any public road.
OTHER DRUGS
There are many drugs which also interfere with a person’s ability to drive safely.
Some are found in medicine prescribed by your doctor, and others are found in
medicine you can buy without a doctor’s prescription.
Here are a few things you should remember:
•
Before taking medicine, it is important to ask your doctor about any possible
effects which might relate to your driving ability.
•
Some allergy remedies and cold pills which you can buy without a prescription
may contain ingredients which can affect your driving ability.
•
Amphetamines are used in stimulants and diet pills, known in the illegal trade
as “pep pills” and “speed”. Over-dosage of these and other drugs, such as tran-
quilizers or sedatives (“downers”), not only greatly impair your ability to drive,
but can be the sole cause of death.
•
The combination of alcohol and drugs, in some cases, can have a much more
pronounced effect than either taken separately. Never mix alcohol and drugs.
•
Some of the most dangerous types of drugs can be obtained only illegally. LSD,
heroin and cocaine are examples. They have the power to make users com-
pletely unaware of or indifferent to their surroundings. Anyone under the influ-
ence of such drugs must not try to operate a motor vehicle.
•
All types of drugs on the “illegal” market are dangerous because there is no
way to be certain of their strength or purity.
56
57
CHAPTER X
SAFE DRIVING TECHNIQUES
NORMAL DRIVING PROCEDURES
DRIVING HABITS
A habit is usually formed when you do the same thing so many times that it
becomes so easy that you do it automatically without any conscious thought as to how
you did it.
You form driving habits because the same physical actions are required to be per-
formed over and over again. Your normal tendency is to reduce these required actions
as much as possible. This reduction takes place without thought, and results in the
formation of “bad” driving habits.
“Bad” driving habits are caused by: (1) Laziness, (2) Impatience, (3) Inattention,
(4) Arrogance, and (5) Ignorance. Typical examples of these habits and how they are
formed are:
LAZINESS
•
When you learned to drive, you should have been taught that the proper pro-
cedure was to look for other traffic before you changed lanes, drove away from
the curb or got out of your vehicle on the traffic side. The procedure always
required you to turn your head and look behind you for oncoming traffic before
taking any action. As you gained proficiency as a driver, you may have inad-
vertently allowed this check to be reduced to only looking in the rear view
mirror and finally to only an occasional check.
•
A related “bad” habit is that of failing to always signal your intentions before
changing lanes, or driving away from the curb. Allowing the combination of
these two “bad” habits to develop could be the cause of your first accident.
IMPATIENCE
•
Everyone knows that you must always come to a complete stop at a stop sign
or at a red light, even when making a right turn, regardless of traffic. Pressure
from following vehicles and the lack of cross traffic may tempt you to just
make a “good try” at stopping. This “bad” habit may grow to a point that you
may find yourself just “slowing down” for a stop sign.
•
It’s easy to spot an impatient driver. He’s the one who speeds from stop to stop,
weaving in and out of traffic, and when he can’t, he tailgates other drivers. He
may be paying close attention to what he is doing but doesn’t seem to realize
that he is disrupting traffic and increasing his chances of becoming involved in
an accident. Don’t permit yourself to develop this dangerous “bad” habit.
INATTENTION
•
A new driver on the road sits up straight, has a firm grip on the steering wheel,
is aware of where he is, and pays attention to the developing traffic problems.
As he gains experience, he relaxes and leans back, releases his grip on the
wheel and may allow his attention to wander. His vehicle then may also wan-
der. This driver can easily be identified. He is driving with one arm out the
58
window and talking to a passenger, gesturing with his other hand and paying
very little attention to the traffic flow. His passengers are often uncomfortable
because of his lack of control of his vehicle. When he is alone, he daydreams
or gazes at objects off of the roadway. His inattention forfeits his safety.
ARROGANCE
•
Where the impatient driver is simply in a hurry, the arrogant driver is purposely in
a hurry. He competes with his vehicle. His vehicle is an extension of his ego. He
has little or no respect for traffic laws or the rights or right-of-way of other drivers
or pedestrians. Never allow yourself to become involved in competition with an
arrogant driver, or become one. There is nothing to gain and too much to lose.
IGNORANCE
•
A driver may not know the meaning of traffic signs, roadway markings, the
rules of right of way and of safe driving procedures. You may notice this per-
son turning from the wrong lane, driving too slowly because he is unsure,
stopped at the end of a freeway on-ramp or crossing pavement markings which
prohibit crossing. Usually the ignorant driver doesn’t realize that he is ignorant
and may think that all other drivers are “out to get him.”
Sometimes a driver has a combination of these “bad” driving habits, and when he
has or is involved in a traffic accident, he is sure that the accident just “happened” to
him and was unavoidable.
Listed below are more bad habits which fit in one or more of the five “bad” driv-
ing categories:
•
Failing to yield to pedestrians or other vehicles having the right of way.
•
Not always wearing safety belts and not insisting that passengers also wear them.
•
Having one or more alcoholic drinks prior to driving home from work. The excuse usual-
ly given is to “miss the traffic.”
•
Backing a vehicle without first making certain that the area is clear.
•
Allowing yourself to be distracted by passengers in your vehicle.
•
Allowing your attention to be diverted by looking at maps, or lighting smoking materials
while driving, etc.
“Good” driving habits can be formed just as easily as the “bad” habits just dis-
cussed. All you have to do is to deliberately accomplish the proper action over and
over again until the good habit is formed. Your trips will become more enjoyable for
yourself and more comfortable for your passengers.
DISTRACTED DRIVING
Being distracted from, or not giving your full attention to your driving, could
result in serious consequences. Anything that takes your attention away from driving
can lead you to make a poor choice when driving.
Avoid eating, drinking, talking on a cell phone, writing, reading, smoking, per-
sonal grooming, changing your CDs or radio station, looking at people or objects
outside your vehicle, looking for things inside your vehicle, talking to passengers,
dealing with children or pets, applying makeup, shaving, etc. Plan ahead and take
care of these things before you start driving. If you need to read a map or directions,
pull over to the side of the road in a safe place. Stop until you are ready to give your
complete attention to driving.
Keep your stereo or radio at a volume low enough so you can hear things outside
of your vehicle. If it is turned up too loud, you may not be able to hear a siren, horn
honking, screeching of tires or other things that would lead you to react to an emer-
gency or hazard in order to prevent a crash. Do not drive with headsets or earphones
that cover or go in both ears. They make it too hard to hear emergency horns or
sirens.
Talking on a cell phone is distracting because your attention is directed more
toward your conversation than your driving. Avoid using your phone or CD radio
when the vehicle is in motion. Even with “hands free” equipment, talking on a
phone or radio take your attention away from driving and can cause you to be less
likely to notice a dangerous situation. If you need to talk on a cell phone, pull over
to the side of the road in a safe place until you are finished with your call. Pets can
be distracting and should not ride in the driver's lap. A carrier is the safest place.
DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Defensive driving is a driving technique in which you identify dangerous driving
situations and take action to defend against the danger before an accident situation
develops. Your “defensive” action will be applied in avoiding vehicles driven by
aggressive, offensive, discourteous, careless, inattentive, impulsive, ignorant, and
intoxicated persons as well as pedestrians who have some of the same characteristics.
If you display any of these characteristics, you must first DEFEND AGAINST
YOURSELF. The basic idea of defensive driving is to recognize possible hazards
associated with various driving situations and to adjust your driving to allow you to
avoid hazards when they develop.
To avoid accidents, you, as a defensive driver, should:
1. Stay alert, keep your eyes moving in order to be aware of developing traffic situations
around you at all times.
2. Look well ahead of your vehicle and anticipate the possibility of a chain reaction traffic
situation.
3. Have an alternate plan of action ready in case an unexpected event develops. (Always leave
yourself a way out.)
4. Always maintain the proper following distance.
5. Always maintain the proper speed for all highway conditions.
ATTENTIVENESS
Almost all of the information you require to drive a vehicle safely is obtained by
looking and SEEING. You must be aware of and be alert to any hazards that appear.
You should have a constant awareness of conditions in the vicinity of your vehicle.
Special attention should be devoted to conditions at a considerable distance ahead of
your vehicle.
SPEED REDUCES YOUR FIELD OF VISION
59
60
The SEEING task should occupy your entire attention while driving. Develop a
scanning pattern with most of your attention devoted to the situation ahead but with
glances to either side, in the rear view mirror, and at the instrument panel at regular
and frequent intervals. Do not become distracted by looking at passengers, attempting
to find something within the vehicle, looking at reading material, sightseeing or day-
dreaming while driving. Many drivers’ statements about accidents begin with “I did-
n’t see ....” In many cases this means “I wasn’t paying attention.”
DRIVER’S CONDITION
A poor physical or mental condition limits your capabilities as a driver. Do not
drive if you are ill, injured, emotionally upset or under the influence of intoxicants. If
you are taking medication, you should obtain and follow your physician’s advice
about driving. If you must make the trip, seek assistance from friends or neighbors or
use some form of public transportation.
If an emergency exists, call the police for assistance.
VEHICLE CONDITION
Your Own Vehicle. Any defect which may affect the safe operation of the vehicle
should be corrected as soon as possible. If the status of the engine coolant, engine oil,
battery water, tire condition and pressure and vehicle lamps have not been checked
within the previous week, you should check them or have them checked at a service
station before you continue your trip. The windshield and all windows should be
clean. ENSURE THAT THE VEHICLE CONTAINS ENOUGH FUEL TO COM-
PLETE THE TRIP.
An Unfamiliar Vehicle. Take a few minutes to familiarize yourself with the loca-
tion and operation of the turn and hazard warning signals, head lamps and beam selec-
tor, windshield wipers and washers, brakes, gear selector and horn. Any defects should
be corrected before the vehicle is driven.
TRIP PLAN
When driving to an unfamiliar area, you should plan your trip.
Destination Location. You should know the exact location of your destination;
don’t start with only a hazy idea of where you are going. If your destination is in an
unfamiliar area, check the location on a map before you start.
Route Plan. Choose the most appropriate route. Consider traffic conditions, road
conditions, weather conditions and light (daylight or darkness) conditions. Avoid trou-
blesome conditions wherever practicable. Allow sufficient time for the trip. If you are
doubtful as to whether you are able to comfortably cope with any undesirable condi-
tions, POSTPONE OR CANCEL THE TRIP.
PRE-STARTING
Equipment warning lamps on the vehicle instrument panel should all be illuminat-
ed when the ignition switch is turned on. A warning lamp that is not illuminated indi-
cates that the lamp is not functioning.
POST-STARTING
After the computer check, the warnings should no longer be illuminated. If a yellow
light remains lit, it is a warning. A red light indicates danger and should be checked
immediately.
The brake warning lamp should go out when the parking brake is released. If it
illuminates when the foot brake pedal is pressed, the brake system is defective and the
vehicle should not be driven.
SAFETY BELTS
Safety belts are life belts. They must be worn at all times when driving or riding 
in a vehicle. They contribute to your safety during a crash by preventing you: 
1. From being thrown from your car.
•
Your chances of being killed are five times greater if you are thrown from
your car.
2. From being injured by striking the windshield or other interior parts of your car.
•
You can survive a crash at speeds up to 60 miles per hour (97 km/h) if using
lap and shoulder belts.
•
If not buckled up, it is possible to be killed in a crash at speeds as low as 12
miles per hour (19 km/h).
3. From injuring other persons in the car by being thrown against them.
•
In an accident infants and small children may be crushed to death by occu-
pants not wearing seat belts.
4. From being thrown from the driver's seat, where you can control the vehicle.
•
The first impact in a crash frequently throws the driver away from the vehi-
cle controls thus preventing any possibility of controlling the vehicle.
Lap belts should fit snugly across your hip bones and the lower part of 
your abdomen. The shoulder belt should be not quite so tight—so that you can insert
your fist between the belt and your chest. All belts in late model vehicles are designed
to allow body movement and only lock up upon impact.
Don’t forget your passengers. There are special child seats available for children
who are too small to wear regular safety belts. No person is strong enough to hold onto
even a small infant in accidents or sudden stops. NEVER ALLOW A CHILD TO
RIDE IN SOM
EONE'S LAP or STANDING ON A SEAT.
ANY EXCUSE FOR NOT WEARING SAFETY BELTS IS INEXCUSABLE.
61
Taking 5 seconds to buckle your seat belt could save you years of having to deal with
a severe handicap.
Safety Belts Prevent the Human Collision
WHAT HAPPENS IN A COLLISION
Unbelted
Belted
62
0.000 Seconds - Car Hits Barrier
On impact, the car begins to crush and to
slow down. The person inside the car has
nothing to slow him down so he continues
to move forward inside the car at 30 mph.
0.050 Seconds - Car Crushes
The car slows down as the crushing of the
front end absorbs some of the force of the
collision. The person inside is still moving
forward at 30 mph.
0.100 Seconds - Car Stops
0.120 Seconds - Person Hits Car Interior
One-fiftieth of a second after the car has
stopped, the person slams into the dash-
board and windshield. This is the human
collision. In the car’s collision it takes 1/10
of a second to stop; in the human collision
it takes only 1/100 of a second.
On impact, the car begins to crush and to
slow down.
As the car slows down, the person moves
forward until the seat belts restrain him.
The belts keep him in his seat and keep his
head and chest from striking the car inte-
rior.
Being fastened to the framework of the car,
belted occupants are able to “ride down”
the collision as part of the car. They are
able to take advantage of the car’s slower
stop, as it crushes and absorbs energy. For
belted people there is no human collision.
63
64
WARNING!  Do not leave children unattended.
Hawaii law prohibits you or any adult passenger from leaving a child, under nine years
of age, unattended in a motor vehicle for five minutes or longer. Leaving a child unsu-
pervised in a vehicle can have tragic consequences, such as the child suffering from
extreme heat exposure or injury when the car is stolen or when parts of the car, such
as the emergency brakes, power windows, and trunk releases, are used inadvertently.
BACKING YOUR VEHICLE
Backing is a dangerous maneuver because of restricted visibility and should be
done with great caution. You should use the following procedures to back a vehicle
with safety:
•
Visually check the area to the rear of the vehicle before entering.
•
Turn around and look to the rear; do not rely on rear-view mirrors. The view
through rear-view mirrors is too small to use for this purpose.
•
If you cannot see to the rear, have someone outside of the vehicle guide you.
•
When the backing movement is first started, apply the brakes gently to insure
proper operation
•
Always back at a slow rate of speed.
•
Watch the front of the vehicle for clearance if you are backing and turning at
the same time.
•
Avoid backing into traffic. Try to park the vehicle so that you will enter traffic
in a forward direction. Always back into the lane nearest the edge of the road-
way when traffic is clear.
•
Avoid backing across or into a roadway whenever possible.
LOOK BACK BEFORE 
DRIVING FROM CURB
LOOK. SIGNAL. YIELD
The chief responsibility for avoiding a collision lies with the driver who is leaving
a parking space. 
Exercise extraordinary caution when backing up in residential areas. Children
often play behind and between parked vehicles.
ENTERING TRAFFIC
Entry into traffic is usually made from a driveway or a roadside parking position.
You should use the following procedures to enter traffic safely:
Entry from a Driveway
•
Always stop before entering the roadway. The stop should be made before
crossing the sidewalk area. Failure to stop is unlawful.
•
Move forward slowly. Watch for pedestrians and oncoming vehicles.
•
Insure that the traffic lane is clear of oncoming vehicles.
•
Enter the nearest lane in a right turn whenever possible.
•
After you are in the traffic lane, accelerate to traffic speed.
65
Entry from a Roadside parked Position
•
If parallel parked, move forward into the nearest traffic lane when there is suf-
ficient space in oncoming traffic.
•
If diagonal parked, you will have to first back into the traffic lane. This is a much
more dangerous and difficult maneuver and requires more time to complete.
ROUNDABOUT
A roundabout is designed to meet the needs of all roadway users---drivers,
pedestrians, pedestrians with disabilities, and bicyclists. A roundabout is a one-way
circular intersection in which entering traffic must yield the right-of-way to circulat-
ing traffic. Each road approaching the roundabout is marked with a yield sign and
may also have yield line markings on the pavement. 
Tips for driving through a roundabout:
• Slow down as you approach the roundabout.
• Yield to pedestrians and bicyclists as you enter and
exit the roundabout.
• Look to the left for traffic and yield to traffic, 
including bicyclists, already in the roundabout.
• Drive to the right of the central island and proceed
in a counterclockwise direction.
• Keep your speed low while in the roundabout.
• Use your right turn signal to exit the roundabout.
• If you miss your exit, drive through the roundabout again until you reach your 
exit.
CHOOSING A PROPER TRAFFIC LANE
One Lane in the Direction of Travel. You have no choice; you must use that lane.
In congested areas you must use great care to avoid conflicts with other vehicles and
pedestrians.
Two Lanes in the Direction of Travel. In open area when traffic is free-flowing, use
the right lane; use the left lane for passing or when vehicles are entering from the
right. In heavy traffic or in congested areas use either lane but keep up with traffic.
Move at a steady speed. Avoid continual lane changing (lane hopping).
Three or More Lanes in the Direction of Travel. Choose the center lanes as there
will be fewer traffic conflicts. Leave the right and left lanes available for vehicles enter-
ing and leaving the roadway. Maintain a steady speed with the flow of traffic and keep
lane changes to a minimum. Use the right lane if you are moving slower than other
traffic.
LANE CHANGING
Lane changes should be kept to a minimum as it is a movement that could conflict
with other traffic.
When a lane change is necessary, use the following procedures:
•
Check highway and traffic conditions ahead, to the sides, and to the rear. Use
your rear-view mirrors and physically check the blind spots (turn your head and look).
•
Signal your intention well in advance. The law requires that you signal for at
least 100 feet (30m) before you start the lane change.
•
When there is ample clearance in the other lane, make a gradual, steady move-
ment into the other lane. AVOID ABRUPT MOVEMENTS: YOU MAY
OVERCONTROL OR LOSE CONTROL OF YOUR VEHICLE. It may be
necessary to adjust the speed of your vehicle slightly to avoid conflict with traf-
fic. It is best to slow slightly and move in behind a vehicle than it is to speed
up and cut in ahead. When you move in behind a vehicle, you always have that
vehicle in sight and there is less annoyance to its driver.
•
Don’t force your way into the space between vehicles that have the minimum
safe following distance or less. This is a discourteous and dangerous action
which causes other drivers to reduce the spacing interval between vehicles to
deny you space to change lanes. If you allow ample time and signal properly,
other courteous drivers will be inclined to allow you space to make the change.
•
ALWAYS YIELD TO VEHICLES IN THE OTHER LANE WHEN CHANG-
ING LANES. If the desired lane is congested, enter at the end of the line; don’t
run up ahead and crowd in. If you cannot make the lane change at the desired
location, remain in your lane until you can safely make the change; even if you
are inconvenienced.
•
NEVER CHANGE LANES WHEN APPROACHING OR MOVING
THROUGH INTERSECTIONS AND CROSSWALKS.
VEHICLE SPEED
“Excessive speed for conditions” is most often listed as the cause of accidents. The
cause of the excessive speed is seldom determined but whether it is due to intoxication,
inattention, competition, etc., it is directly controlled by the driver. Un fortunately,
most vehicles can attain speeds that are far beyond the capabilities of the driver, the
road, and the vehicle itself.
The proper safe vehicle speed must be adjusted to traffic, weather, and road con-
ditions and should always be within the posted speed limits.
66
You should use the following procedures in maintaining a safe vehicle speed:
•
Keep pace with traffic. Vehicles moving in the same direction at the same speed
never collide. If you move faster than other traffic, you constantly cause addi-
tional conflicts with other vehicles. If you cannot keep up with traffic, move as
far to the right as possible.
•
Maintain a safe following interval. One of the most common types of accident,
striking the vehicle ahead, is usually caused by following too closely. To insure
adequate interval, note when the vehicle ahead is opposite a tree, a telephone
pole or other marker, then start counting at a normal rate “one thousand one,
one thousand two, etc.” If you get to the word two before your vehicle reaches
the marker, you have at least a two second interval. You should never have less.
Following too closely reduces your ability to see road and traffic conditions
ahead and you will be unable to avoid trouble when it develops.
•
Maintain a steady speed. Constantly changing speed confuses other drivers as
to your intentions. Bursts of speed and heavy braking are both wasteful and
dangerous.
•
Reduce your speed when you encounter poor road or weather conditions. At
slower speeds you can maintain better control of your vehicle and you will have
more time to avoid dangerous situations.
•
Never let your emotions determine the speed of your vehicle. Never be in a
hurry, you may never arrive at all.
TURNS AND CURVES
Turns are changes of direction from a traffic lane made at intersections or drive-
ways. Curves are changes in direction of the road or traffic lane. In some cases,  the
safe procedures are similar:
•
Get into the proper lane for a turn well in advance. Turn from the traffic lane
nearest the direction of the turn and into the nearest traffic lane available. If you
are not in the proper lane when you want to turn, continue on and make the turn
elsewhere. Don’t force your way into the proper lane or make abrupt last
minute lane changes.
•
Make precise turns; don’t swing wide or cut short.
•
Slow to a proper speed before you enter a curve or begin a turn. Maintain a
steady speed while in the curve or turn. Braking or an abrupt change of speed
in a turn or curve can cause you to lose control of your vehicle.
•
Avoid left and “U” turns whenever possible. These turns conflict more with
other traffic, are much more hazardous than right turns and also impede other
traffic.
•
Use great care in watching for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcyclists when
making turns; they may be hidden by other vehicles, darkness or poor weather.
•
Always bring your vehicle to a complete stop before making a right turn when
facing a red traffic signal.
•
Use extra caution on curves and turns in poor weather conditions or when there
is gravel, sand, or mud on the road.
•
When making a right turn at an intersection, do not drive in a bike lane.
67
•
While waiting to turn left at an intersection with a red traffic light, when the
traffic light turns green, move slowly into the intersection, keep the wheels
pointing straight ahead and turn when the intersection is clear, and it is safe
to do so.
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
Overtaking and passing another vehicle is hazardous on two or three lane roads
where a lane for traffic moving in the opposite direction must be used to complete the
passing maneuver. Improper procedures can cause a head-on collision. Use the fol-
lowing procedures for safe passing:
•
Pass only if the vehicle ahead is moving below the safe speed.
•
Don’t attempt to pass a vehicle ahead simply because it is there.
•
Don’t attempt to pass vehicles merely to gain a few car lengths in moderate or
heavy traffic.
•
In a line of vehicles, allow the vehicles ahead to pass the lead vehicle before
you attempt to pass.
•
Pass on the left except when the vehicle you are overtaking is making or about
to make a left turn. Pass vehicles making left turns carefully on the right.
NEVER DRIVE ONTO THE ROAD SHOULDER TO PASS A VEHICLE
MAKING A LEFT TURN.
•
Obey all signs and traffic lane markings which restrict or prohibit passing.
•
Allow ample following distance between your vehicle and the overtaken vehi-
cle so that you can observe any opposing or conflicting traffic.
•
Check ahead to see that there is no opposing or conflicting traffic, then SIG-
NAL that you intend to move to the left.
•
Physically check behind to see that there are no vehicles attempting to pass
your vehicle.
•
Sound your horn so that the driver ahead knows that you are going to pass.
•
Accelerate to passing speed in your lane of travel. Then move left and begin to
pass.
•
If a conflict appears before you have completed passing, brake sharply and
return to the lane behind the overtaken vehicle. Do not attempt to increase your
speed to complete passing. Speed can be reduced more quickly by applying the
brakes than it can be increased by applying more power.
•
Move back into the proper traffic lane when you can see the overtaken vehicle
in your interior rear-view mirror.
On roadways where there are two or more lanes for traffic moving in the same
direction, do not move into a lane for opposing traffic when attempting to pass. You
may pass a vehicle on either side by using the proper lane change procedures. Be extra
careful about passing on the right because you will approach the overtaken vehicle in
the driver’s blind spot.
IN ALL PASSING SITUATIONS YOU SHOULD NOT ATTEMPT TO PASS
ANOTHER VEHICLE WHEN APPROACHING OR MOVING THROUGH AN
INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
68
69
PASSING PARKED CARS
Use care when passing cars parked by the roadside. These vehicles obstruct your
view of possible conflict with other vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. Be alert to the
possibility that a parked car may suddenly move into your traffic lane or that a door
may be opened into the path of your vehicle.
Watch for these clues:
•
Movement within the vehicle or within the vicinity of the vehicle.
•
Stop lamps, back-up lamps or signal lamps that are illuminated.
•
Smoke or visible vapor from the exhaust pipe.
•
A turning movement of the front wheels.
When you approach a vehicle that has just stopped in a parked position, assume
that the driver will open the door as you approach.
STOPPING IN TRAFFIC
Stopping unnecessarily in a traffic lane is dangerous, discourteous, inconsiderate
and illegal. Stops made to load or unload passengers or cargo or to converse with other
drivers or pedestrians must be made in a designated parking space, loading zone or
other place out of a traffic lane.
You should not stop your vehicle within an intersection or a crosswalk. NEVER
DRIVE YOUR VEHICLE INTO AN INTERSECTION OR A CROSSWALK
UNLESS THERE IS SPACE FOR YOUR ENTIRE VEHICLE ON THE OPPOSITE
SIDE OF THE INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
USE OF BRAKES
Brakes are devices used to stop and hold a vehicle in a fixed position. Brakes stop
a vehicle by converting the vehicle’s energy of motion into heat and wasting it. Every
time you use the brakes you waste the money you paid for fuel and cause wear on the
brakes and tires. Careful use of the brakes can save considerable energy and money in
replacing fuel, brakes and tires. Avoid bursts of speed followed by heavy braking.
A hard application of the brakes can cause one or more wheels to slide on the road.
If the wheel(s), especially the front wheel(s), continues to slide, you will not have con-
trol of the vehicle. If you are in danger of striking another vehicle, a person or object,
70
don’t just jam on the brakes and slide the wheels; you will almost certainly strike the
thing you are trying to avoid. Instead, apply and release the brakes rapidly and STEER
the vehicle toward a clear area. Steer off the road if necessary but avoid hitting peo-
ple, trees, utility poles and substantial objects or structures.
Avoid braking while turning; slow down before you turn. Use the brakes very cau-
tiously if there is water, ice, snow, frost, sand or gravel on the surface of the road.
Always test the action of the brakes after driving through water. If the braking
action has been reduced, apply the brakes lightly several times until proper braking
action has been restored.
Avoid resting your foot on the brake pedal while you drive. This causes the brake
(stop) lamps to be activated and gives the following drivers an improper signal. It will
also cause the brakes to be partly applied in many vehicles and result in excessive
brake wear.
If the brake warning lamp on the instrument panel lights up when you apply the
brakes, the brake system has partially failed and immediate repair is required.
Always start slowing your vehicle as soon as it becomes apparent that braking
action will be required ahead. Make smooth steady brake applications. When stopping
in traffic, stop far enough behind the vehicle ahead so that you can see the point where
the rear tires of the vehicle ahead rest on the road. This will allow room to go around
Avoid prolonged brake applications as this causes the brakes to heat up and
become much less effective. Usually prolonged brake use can be avoided by shifting
to a lower gear and allowing the engine to assist in holding the vehicle speed down.
DOWNSHIFTING
“Downshifting” is the procedure of selecting a lower transmission gear range
while the vehicle is in motion. This procedure can be used with both manual and auto-
matic transmissions. Downshifting is used for two purposes: (1) To obtain greater
braking action from the engine when reducing speed or when maintaining a reduced
speed on a downgrade; and (2) to obtain increased performance when accelerating to
a higher speed.
1. Downshifting is a proper procedure when used to obtain additional braking
effect from the engine when going down a steep grade. The down shift should
be made before starting the downgrade because it is more difficult to downshift
at higher speeds.
Manual Transmissions. All modern passenger car manual transmissions are “syn-
chronized” so that any forward gear range may be selected when the clutch pedal is 
depressed with the car in motion. The downshift procedure is: depress the clutch 
pedal, move the shift lever to the next lower gear, and SLOWLY release the clutch 
pedal.
On non-synchronized manual transmissions the technique is more difficult as it
requires that the engine speed for the lower gear range be matched with the vehicle
speed before the shift can be made. This procedure is sometimes called “double
clutching” and should not be attempted without prior practice and experience.
Automatic Transmissions. On most automatic transmissions a downshift from the
“drive” position to the next lower gear can be accomplished at normal speeds by
the vehicle should it not be able to proceed.
71
merely moving the selector level to the next lower position. At high speeds (60+ miles
per hour) (97+ km/h) most automatic transmissions will not downshift. In this case it
is necessary to reduce the vehicle speed to allow the automatic transmission to downshift.
The practice of downshifting as a regular routine IS NOT RECOMMENDED
because it causes a rapid deceleration of the vehicle without a warning (stop lamp)
signal to following drivers. Downshifting to reduce speed should be used only to sup-
plement brake action.
2. Downshifting to obtain increased acceleration performance with manual trans-
missions is accomplished in the same manner as previously indicated except
that after the shift is accomplished the engine speed is increased to obtain the
desired acceleration.
At normal highway speeds all passenger car automatic transmissions will downshift
automatically when the accelerator pedal is fully depressed. CAUTION: DOWN-
SHIFTING AT HIGHER SPEEDS MAY ACTUALLY DECREASE THE ABILITY
OF THE VEHICLE TO ACCELERATE. Abuse of the downshifting technique subjects
the engine and transmission to great stress and can lead to costly repairs.
Downshifting may properly be used as an emergency procedure to slow the vehi-
cle in case of a partial or complete brake failure.
Use extra care when downshifting because the unequal forces developed may
cause vehicle control problems on a slippery road surface.
PARKING
Always park your vehicle at a location that is clear of traffic and where it is read-
ily visible to the drivers of approaching vehicles. Avoid locations that are hidden, such
as just beyond a curve or the crest of a hill.
PARKING ON A HILL
Whether you park uphill or downhill turn the wheels to the right. This will ensure
that the vehicle will roll away from traffic if something causes it to roll free.
Make sure your car does not roll into traffic if the brakes do not hold when park-
ing on a hill. Always set the hand brake. Shift to the PARK position if you have one. If 
not, shift to reverse or low gear. Always turn the front wheels towards the curb. This 
will maximize the amount of force required to make the vehicle roll free. That is, all  
four wheels will need to go over the curb before the vehicle is free.
B.TURN WHEELS 
TO RIGHT
A.TURN WHEELS 
TO RIGHT
72
ANGLE PARKING
Keep safe clearance.
Drive forward into space—equal
space on each side between lines.
PARALLEL PARKING
Front and rear bumpers should not be closer than two feet from the other vehicles
when in parked position unless the street is otherwise marked.
STEP 1:
Signal, stop even with front car
about 18 inches from it, rear bumpers
even.
STEP 3:
When front bumper is even with
other car’s back bumper, turn wheels
sharply and rapidly to left as far as pos-
sible. Back slowly to car behind without
touching it. 
STEP 2:
Back slowly, turning steering wheel
sharp right until your car is at about 45-
degree angle with the street. Quickly
straighten front wheels and back slowly.
STEP 4:
Turn steering wheel sharply to the
right and slowly pull forward. Center
car in space.
73
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Where angle parking is not clearly designated, a vehicle must be parked parallel
to the curb, heading in the direction of traffic. When parallel parked, the vehicle’s
curbside wheels shall be within 12 inches of the curb (30cm), or completely within
the marked parking stall.
TURN, STOP AND HAZARD WARNING SIGNALS
Electric Signals. Electric stop signals have been standard equipment on vehicles
for more than 50 years and most vehicles manufactured since the early 1950s have
been equipped with electric turn signals. Since 1968 all vehicles have been equipped
with electric turn, stop, and hazard warning (4-way flash) signals. Most vehicles oper-
ating today were originally completely equipped with electric signals.
Advantages–Electric Signals
•
Maybe be instantly operated from a closed vehicle.
•
Are readily visible in darkness or inclement weather.
•
Are visible from all angles except the immediate sides of the signaling vehicle.
•
Can seldom be misinterpreted or confused with other activities.
•
Allow the driver to use both hands to control the vehicle when signaling.
Disadvantages–Electric Signals
•
Failure to cancel the operation of a turn signal.
•
Failure of the signal to function properly.
Failure to cancel is usually caused by making a turn or lane change which is too
small to cause operation of the self-cancelling mechanism and failure of the driver to
observe the indicator on the instrument panel. Improper functioning of a turn signal
should be readily apparent to the driver by observation of the indicator. Any abnormal
function of the indicator lamp is a clue to improper operation of the signal system.
Hand Signals. Hand signals continue to be an accepted method by which the driv-
er can indicate his intentions to other highway users. Knowledge of the proper hand
signals is required if the electric signals fail.
Advantages–Hand Signals
•
Are usually not subject to failure.
Disadvantages–Hand Signals
•
Are difficult to distinguish from hand and arm motions which the driver does
not intend as signals.
•
Are difficult to see in darkness and inclement weather.
•
Are not readily visible to drivers on the right of the signaling vehicle.
•
Require that the driver’s window be open.
•
Require the driver to use one hand to control the vehicle when signaling.
HAZARD WARNING SIGNALS
Hazard warning signals (4-way flash) are intended to warn other drivers that a
vehicle is in a hazardous position on the roadway. THIS SIGNAL SHOULD NEVER
BE USED WHEN THE VEHICLE IS MOVING. Operation of this signal is shown by
the flashing of all turn signal indicators. There is no hand signal designated for this
purpose.
74
STOP SIGNALS
Electric stop lamps are automatically operated when the service brake is used. At
night the illumination of the stop lamps should be visible when you look to the rear
of the vehicle while depressing the brake pedal. A hand signal may be used by the
driver to indicate either braking or slowing of the vehicle.
USE OF TURN SIGNALS
Turn signals are used to indicate your intent to other users of the highway. The use
of a signal does not give you the right to make the intended movement. You alone are
responsible for making the movement safely and in a manner that does not interfere
with other highway users.
Traffic regulations require that you display a turn signal for at least 100 feet (30
meters) before making every turn or lane change. Always signal for a length of time
sufficient to allow other highway users to see the signal and understand your intent.
If you must slow your vehicle before you can make the intended turn or lane
change, it is important that you begin signaling before slowing your vehicle. This will
alert other drivers to the possibility that you might reduce the speed of your vehicle.
Some common signaling errors are:
•
Failure to signal an intended turn when stopped at an intersection until the traf-
fic signal changes.
•
Failure to signal, giving an insufficient signal, or signaling after the turn or lane
change has been started. (Usually accompanied by abrupt turns or lane changes
or forcing entry into a line of vehicles.)
•
Failure to signal for an intended right turn.
•
Failure to signal when in a lane that requires that you turn.
•
Failure to signal when it appears that there is no one to observe the signal.
Failure to use a turn signal properly is a frequent driver error. Failure to signal
properly indicates driver ignorance, arrogance, or uncertainty and shows a lack of con-
sideration and courtesy towards others. It may also indicate that the driver has no idea
of what he is going to do next and is thus unable to indicate his intentions to anyone
else.
THREE IMPORTANT RULES ABOUT TURN SIGNALS:
•
SIGNAL EVERY TIME YOU INTEND TO MAKE A TURN OR LANE
CHANGE.
•
BEGIN SIGNALING WELL IN ADVANCE OF THE INTENDED TURN OR
LANE CHANGE SO OTHERS HAVE TIME TO SEE AND UNDERSTAND
WHAT YOU INTEND TO DO.
•
THE SIGNAL ONLY INDICATES YOUR INTENT; IT DOES NOT GIVE
YOU THE RIGHT TO MAKE THE MOVEMENT.
The proper use of turn signals is an easily acquired good driving habit.
TRAFFIC MIX
When driving, you must share the road with drivers of vehicles of all sizes; trucks,
buses, passenger cars, motorcycles, bicycles and pedestrians. Larger vehicles afford
more protection to occupants and are easier to see but are more difficult for the driv-
er to operate. Small vehicles offer less protection to occupants and are less visible but
75
are more agile and easier to operate. When you drive you must recognize the capabil-
ities and limitations of other vehicles as well as your own.
As a driver you should be very careful to look for smaller vehicles, especially
motorcycles and bicycles, and insure that you can be seen by the driver of larger vehi-
cles such as trucks and buses.
Give motorcyclists, bicyclists and pedestrians plenty of room on the road and use
extra caution to look for them when making turns or changing lanes. A MOTOR-
CYCLIST IS ENTITLED TO THE ENTIRE WIDTH OF HIS TRAFFIC LANE.
SPECIAL DRIVING TECHNIQUES
DRIVING IN INCLEMENT WEATHER
Hawaii does not experience the widely different kinds of weather that many other
areas do. Here weather problems associated with driving are primarily due to rain with
some isolated fog on roads at high elevations and, occasionally, gusty winds.
Rain. Rain causes two basic driving problems; it reduces the driver’s visibility and
changes the condition of the road surface.
The first few drops of rain are a danger signal to a defensive driver. Roads are most
slippery at this time because the oil dropped from passing cars has not been washed
away. Driving on a road covered with oil and water can be like driving on ice. You should
reduce speed, use extra caution, and allow at least twice the normal following distance.
Prolonged or heavy rain will cause a layer of water on the surface of the road. At
speeds up to 35 miles per hour (56 km/h), tires with good highway type tread will
“wipe” the road surface the way a windshield wiper cleans the windshield. As speed
increases, the water cannot be removed fast enough and the tires start to ride up on the
layer of water like a surfboard. This is called “hydroplaning”.
Partial hydroplaning may start at 35 miles per hour (56 km/h). The extent of
hydroplaning increases with speed and with the amount of water on the highway. At
55 miles per hour (89 km/h) in a heavy rain the tires may lose all contact with the
pavement. When this happens, you cannot brake, accelerate or turn; YOU HAVE NO
CONTROL OVER YOUR VEHICLE.
76
To prevent hydroplaning you should:
•
Insure that the tires on the vehicle have good tread depth. Worn or bald tires
will hydroplane at lower speeds.
•
Insure that the tires on the vehicle are inflated to the proper pressure. Under-
inflated tires hydroplane at lower speeds.
•
Reduce the speed of the vehicle. Hydroplaning occurs most frequently at high-
er speeds.
Brakes often become wet after driving through deep water or prolonged driving in
heavy rain. They may pull to one side or the other, or they may not hold at all. Reduce
speed and apply gentle pressure on the brake pedal until your brakes work properly
again.
Rain reduces your ability to see clearly. Rain may be so heavy that you are
unable to see clearly with the windshield wipers operating. When heavy rain 
reduces your visibility, reduce your speed; turn on your head lamps (low beam) so 
that others may see you. If the rain is so heavy that you are unable to see clearly, 
drive onto the road shoulder or other clear area and stop until the rain lets up.
Avoid driving through flooded areas; you may become stranded. Never drive
through a flooded area where water over one foot deep (30 cm) is moving swiftly. The
water will sweep your vehicle off the road.
Fog. In Hawaii fog almost never occurs at lower elevations. Fog may be encoun-
tered on roads at higher elevations where low-lying clouds meet the ground surface.
Patches of fog are particularly hazardous because you may encounter them suddenly
without being aware of their presence.
It is best to avoid driving in fog, but if you must, you should:*
•
Sharply reduce speed and turn on low beam head lamps. Never use the high
beam because the reflection especially at night will reduce your ability to see
and the light will reduce the approaching driver’s ability to see.
•
Be prepared for an emergency stop.
•
If you are unable to see at least two car lengths (40 feet or 12 meters), pull
completely off the pavement and stop. Turn on the hazard warning signals.
Winter Driving. Winter creates additional driving hazards not encountered in
Hawaii. If you plan to drive in other areas under winter conditions, the following sug-
gestions will help. Unless you have experience, it is safest to avoid driving under these
conditions.
•
Equip your car with snowtread tires.
•
Get the feel of the road. Start out slowly. Test the brakes gently after the vehi-
cle is in motion.
•
Keep the car windows clear of snow, ice and frost.
•
Keep a safe distance from the car ahead. Watch for other vehicles that are hav-
ing trouble with slippery road surfaces.
•
Drive at a reduced speed. Drive on the clear, dry portions of the road wherever
possible.
*These precautions also apply when visibility is reduced for any reason: heavy rain,
smoke, fog, heavy snow, etc.
•
Watch for danger spots. Ice may accumulate on or under bridges even when the
rest of the road is clear. Snow and ice melt more slowly in shady areas. Watch
for shiny spots in the road; they could be icy.
•
Use brakes very cautiously and intermittently if you must stop on packed snow
or ice. If you lockup the wheels, you will lose control of your vehicle. Steer into
a clear area if a collision seems imminent.
Dawn and Dusk Driving. When driving towards the rising or setting sun, use sun
visors and sun glasses. Insure that the windshield and windows of the vehicle are
absolutely clean to reduce glare and improve vision.
For a short period before the sun rises and after the sun sets there is not enough
light to see objects clearly. This condition is worse when the sky is cloudy. During this
time of the day you should turn the head lamps on low beam so others can see you.
Be alert for unlighted objects and pedestrians.
Night Driving. No one can see as well at night as they can in the daylight. In addi-
tion, a driver’s exposure to alternate light and darkness prevents him from attaining his
best seeing ability at night.
You should take the following precautions to insure safety when driving at night:
•
Protect your eyes from bright light for several hours before you drive.
•
Insure that the windshield and windows are thoroughly clean, inside and out.
•
Insure that all lamps on the vehicle are operating properly.
•
Reduce your speed so that you can stop within the distance you can see ahead.
•
Do not use your high beam head lamps when approaching or following other
vehicles.
•
If the lights of an approaching vehicle are too bright, flash your high beams
once and look at the right edge of the road and use lane markings or reflectors
as a guide.
•
Recognize that red lane marking reflectors mean you are going the wrong
direction in the traffic lane.
FREEWAY DRIVING
Freeways are safe high-speed roadways. They are safe and efficient because there
are no steep hills or sharp curves to restrict sight distance; there are no stop signs, no
traffic signals, no railroad crossings, and no entrances or exits except at planned loca-
tions. Driving on a freeway is different from driving on other highways. By adhering
to the following special procedures and rules your trip on the freeway will be safer.
77
PLAN YOUR TRIP
Use a Map
•
Plan exactly where you going to enter and leave the freeway.
•
Be sure that your vehicle is properly equipped with gasoline, oil, water and
good tires. Service stations are located off the freeway.
•
A BREAKDOWN ON THE FREEWAY CAN CREATE AN EXTREMELY
DANGEROUS SITUATION.
ENTERING THE FREEWAY
•
Follow the signs directing you to the correct freeway entrance.
•
Observe traffic in the entrance lane. If it is congested, slow down or stop near the
entrance (see illustration). DO NOT MOVE SLOWLY TO THE END OF THE
ENTRANCE LANE AND STOP. It is very difficult and dangerous to attempt
to enter freeway traffic when you are stopped at the end of the entrance lane.
•
When the entrance lane is clear, use your turn signal to indicate that you are
going to merge into the freeway traffic lane; then increase the speed of your
vehicle to match that of the freeway traffic.
•
Look to see if there are any oncoming vehicles in the freeway near lane. If not,
move into the freeway near lane and maintain your speed. If there are oncoming
vehicles, slow your vehicle slightly and move in behind the oncoming vehicle.
78
79
DRIVING ON THE FREEWAY
•
Be attentive to all signs.
•
Through traffic should use the left or center lanes and move at or near the post-
ed speed limit.
•
The right lane is used by vehicles that are unable to keep up with the through
traffic.
•
The right lane should remain open for traffic entering and leaving the freeway
as much as possible.
•
If you are in the right lane, allow space for entering vehicles.
•
Avoid lane changes.
•
Signal well in advance of any intended lane changes.
•
Use your rear-view mirrors.
•
Look back before changing lanes.
•
NEVER STOP ON THE FREEWAY UNLESS IT IS ABSOLUTELY
UNAVOIDABLE.
•
Do not slow down unnecessarily.
•
Do not follow too closely. Rear end collisions are common on freeways and
usually involve several vehicles.
•
Never cross the center divider of a freeway; never turn around on a freeway;
never back up on a freeway.
•
If for any reason you must proceed in the opposite direction, go to the next exit,
leave the freeway and re-enter in the opposite direction.
EMERGENCY STOPS
•
Try to get off the freeway at the next exit if you can.
•
If you must stop, drive entirely off the roadway as far away from traffic as
possible.
•
Never stand or walk on the freeway.
•
Do not stop to assist other drivers in trouble but report the situation to the
proper authorities.
80
LEAVING THE FREEWAY
•
Watch the exit signs so you can choose the proper exit.
•
Use your turn signal to indicate your intention to exit.
•
Move into the exit lane.
•
Maintain your speed until you are completely into the exit ramp, then slow
down smoothly.
•
If you pass the place where you intended to exit, DO NOT STOP; DO NOT
BACK UP! Continue on to the next exit.
EMERGENCY DRIVING PROCEDURES
Obviously, a procedure cannot be given for every possible kind of driving emer-
gency. Some of the more common driving emergency procedures will be covered in
the following paragraphs. The basic factors involved in all driving emergencies
involve the use of brakes, steering and power. Remember these basic points:
•
Try not to panic.
•
Avoid slamming on the brakes and sliding the wheels. You cannot control a
vehicle when the wheels are sliding.
•
Antilock brakes do this for you automatically. Try to steer into a less
dangerous location. Apply maximum braking without sliding the wheels. If any 
wheel slides, release the brakes and reapply them when the vehicle is no longer 
sliding or skidding.
•
Wear your safety belts so you can remain in a position to control your vehicle.
•
Continue to try to control your vehicle even after striking another object.
TIRE BLOWOUTS
A tire blowout is the sudden release of air from a tire resulting in its collapse, and 
can cause you to lose control of the vehicle. Tire blowouts are most often the result of 
improper tire care and maintenance. Check air pressure and tire condition every 
month.
81
If you experience a tire blowout on your vehicle:
•
DO NOT APPLY THE BRAKES. This may cause your vehicle to become
uncontrollable.
•
Grip the steering wheel firmly and steer to remain in your traffic lane. (There
may be a strong pull to the right or the left, or the pull may be in one direction
and then the other.)
•
Reduce speed gradually without using the brakes until you are moving very
slowly, then
•
Apply the brakes lightly and pull off the road into a safe area. (You can drive
for some distance with a blown out tire at a very slow speed without causing
damage to the wheel rim.)
LOSS OF WHEEL
This is a rather uncommon emergency but if it should occur, use the same correc-
tive procedure as for a tire blowout. A total or partial brake failure is likely when a
wheel is lost. Once stopped, you will be unable to move the vehicle; it must be towed.
BRAKE FAILURE
Total brake failure is very unlikely on modern passenger cars. The service brake
system is constructed so that partial braking is almost always possible. A partial fail-
ure will result in reduced braking ability and will be indicated by a warning light on
the instrument panel.
If your brakes fail completely:
•
Pump the brake pedal quickly; then
•
Shift to a lower gear.
•
Look for an escape route (a side road or a flat open area). Use lights and horn
to warn others.
•
Apply the parking brake gradually and bring your vehicle to a stop. (Do not
apply the parking brake rapidly or with a great force or you may lose control
of your vehicle.)
STEERING FAILURE
Complete steering failure is rather uncommon and almost never occurs on a prop-
erly maintained vehicle. If your vehicle is equipped with power steering, a partial loss
of steering control may occur. In this case you will have to exert greater effort on the
steering wheel to control the direction of the vehicle.
DO NOT GIVE UP, APPLY WHATEVER FORCE IS NECESSARY TO THE
STEERING WHEEL TO CONTROL YOUR VEHICLE.
If the steering fails completely:
•
Slowly reduce speed.
•
Apply brakes as necessary to avoid striking any object and try to stop as
smoothly as possible.
WHEELS OFF PAVEMENT
If your vehicle should slip off the edge of
the road, loose gravel, dirt or the edge of the
pavement may tend to keep the vehicle from
returning to the paved surface smoothly. If
this happens:
•
DO NOT ATTEMPT TO FORCE
THE VEHICLE BACK ONTO THE
PAVEMENT BY JERKING THE
STEERING WHEEL.
•
Continue to drive with the wheels off the pavement and reduce speed.
•
Use the brakes gently.
•
When at a safe speed, turn the steering wheel to return to the pavement. Be pre-
pared to make an immediate adjustment to remain in your traffic lane.
OVERTAKING VEHICLE IN DANGER
If another vehicle is attempting to overtake and pass you but cannot complete pass-
ing because of oncoming traffic, you can help avoid a collision by:
•
Steering your vehicle as far to the right as you can with safety, even onto the
shoulder if possible.
•
If the passing vehicle continues to attempt to pass, slowing your vehicle so the
passing vehicle may move into the lane ahead of you.
•
If the passing vehicle appears to be slowing in an attempt to return to the lane
behind your vehicle, accelerate your vehicle to allow the passing vehicle to
return to the lane in the rear of your vehicle. (In either case be certain of the
intentions of the driver of the passing vehicle before you change the speed of
your vehicle.)
ONCOMING VEHICLE IN YOUR LANE
If you observe an oncoming vehicle in your traffic lane:
•
Flash your lights and honk the horn.
•
Quickly slow your vehicle and steer to the right out of the lane into any avail-
able clear area. DO NOT ENTER THE ONCOMING TRAFFIC LANE.
•
Drive off the road if necessary. Avoid solid objects and pedestrians.
ACCELERATOR STUCK OPEN
If your vehicle’s accelerator sticks open, your vehicle will continue to maintain
speed or accelerate even though you remove your foot from the accelerator pedal.
Quite frequently this situation develops immediately after the pedal has been fully
82
depressed. This causes the vehicle to continue to accelerate rapidly. In any case you
should:
•
Slap the accelerator pedal hard with your foot.
•
Turn the ignition off. (Use care to move the ignition switch only far enough to
stop the engine and not engage the steering wheel locking mechanism. Vehicles
equipped with power steering and power brakes will require increased effort on
these controls.)
•
Apply the brakes.
•
Pull off the roadway into a safe area.
POWER STEERING FAILURE
This situation usually occurs in combination with engine failure or loss of the belt
driving the power unit. In any case additional effort will be required to maintain steer-
ing control.
•
Reduce speed.
•
Drive to a safe area and stop.
SKIDS
Most skidding is caused by making sudden changes in direction or speed. Excessive
speed for existing road and traffic conditions is the most common cause. Extra care
should be used when driving on wet, slippery or gravel-covered road surfaces.
If your vehicle begins to skid, it is important to take immediate smooth corrective
action before you lose control. Unless you have experienced a skid in a vehicle, prop-
er corrective action may seem unnatural. It is important to remember that when you
encounter a skid or control problem, you should stop or reduce whatever it was that
you were doing when the problem started. To steer out of a skid:
•
Avoid using the brakes. If the skid started when you applied the brakes, release
the brakes.
•
Ease off the accelerator. The skid may stop as soon as you do this.
•
Turn the steering wheel in the direction that the rear of the vehicle is skidding.
Turn the steering wheel firmly but do not make a large sudden turn of the
wheel. If skidding to the right, turn the wheel to the right. Turn left for a skid
to the left. As the skid stops, turn the steering to the straight ahead position.
•
Overcorrecting may cause the vehicle to skid in the opposite direction. Steer
gently into the skid again. Repeat this procedure until you have the vehicle
under control.
83
FIRE
Fire may occur in any part of the vehicle where there is combustible material.
Usually fires occur as the result of an overheated engine, an electrical short, a fuel leak,
or an oil leak. Any burning odor should be immediately investigated. If fire occurs or
is suspected in the vehicle:
•
Drive to a safe area clear of traffic and stop.
•
Turn the ignition switch and all other electrical switches off.
•
Get all occupants out of and away from the vehicle and clear off the roadway.
Poisonous fumes may rapidly fill the vehicle.
•
If the fire is small, use a fire extinguisher, dirt, sand or a blanket to smother the
fire. DO NOT USE WATER ON GASOLINE, OIL, OR ELECTRICAL FIRES.
•
If a large gasoline or oil fire develops, you might not be able to extinguish it.
Don’t try, seek assistance.
BREAKDOWNS OR ENGINE FAILURE
Fortunately, the occurrence of most vehicle breakdowns are not dangerous but 
may create a hazardous situation. Often the vehicle stalls in a hazardous position in 
rela-tion to other traffic.
•
If possible, move the vehicle to a safe location.
•
Keep vehicle occupants away from traffic. If the vehicle cannot be moved from
a hazardous position but there is a safe location that can be reached by the vehi-
cle occupants, move the occupants to the safe location.
•
In all other cases, occupants should remain in the vehicle.
•
Use hazard warning lights, flares, warning reflectors and a flashlight as
required. These items should always be carried in your vehicle.
•
Be cautious about those that offer help. Remain locked in the vehicle until you
are sure of the person’s intentions. If in doubt, ask that the police be notified.
•
Indicate the need for assistance by raising the hood of your vehicle. Tie a white
cloth to the radio antenna or the door handle or use a sign made for the purpose
if available.
•
If you must leave your vehicle, lock it securely and return as soon as practicable.
•
If you must walk along the highway, walk facing traffic and well clear of the
roadway. Do not walk on freeways; stay with your vehicle until help arrives.
84
85
CHAPTER XI
TRUCKS, TRAILERS, BUSES AND MOTORCYCLES
When you are driving on the streets and highways, you will have to share the road 
with vehicles that are much larger than ordinary passenger cars and light trucks. The 
operation of these trucks, tractor-semitrailers, truck trailers and buses requires special 
driving skill, attentiveness and consideration for other highway users. To insure your 
safety, you and other highway users must also be aware of the limitations of 
these vehicles.
DRIVERS OF LARGE VEHICLES
Driver Licenses
Drivers of large vehicles must hold a valid driver’s license for the category of vehi-
cle being driven. Information concerning all types of driver licenses may be found in
Chapter I, Licensing of Drivers.
Professional Drivers
Many, if not most drivers of large vehicles, earn their living by operating these
vehicles; it is their profession. Because they spend much more time driving than other
drivers, they should be the most skilled, knowledgeable and experienced drivers on the
highways. They should demonstrate the mark of the true professional by setting the
example of proper, safe driving. Also, they are exposed to the hazards of driving for
much greater periods of time than ordinary drivers.
Driver Responsibilities
Due to their large size and heavy weight these vehicles can cause great damage and
injury when involved in an accident. The drivers of these vehicles must be constantly
aware of the limitations and potential of their vehicles and recognize their responsi-
bility to give proper consideration to other highway users as well as to their passen-
gers and cargo.
LIMITATIONS OF LARGE VEHICLES
Visibility
Larger vehicles generally provide better forward visibility than other vehicles
because the driver’s position is above most other vehicles. However, visibility to the
sides and rear is severely limited; other traffic can only be seen by the use of mirrors
and the area to the immediate rear of the vehicle is not visible to the driver.
•
Drivers of large vehicles must make allowances for the greater width and length
of their vehicles when turning, changing lanes or backing.
•
Other drivers and highway users should allow the large vehicle driver addi-
tional space to make the maneuvers safely.
Maneuvering Space
Large vehicles require more space for turning movements.
•
Drivers of large vehicles should use great caution when turning or backing to
insure that the movement can be made without interference with other highway
users.
•
When near large vehicles, the drivers of other vehicles and other highway users
should remain in a location where they can be seen by the driver of the large
vehicle and where their view of other traffic is not blocked.
Stopping Distance
Large vehicles require greater stopping distances than other vehicles.
•
Drivers of large vehicles must make allowances for the additional distance
required to stop.
•
When changing lanes or at intersections other drivers and highway users must
make allowances for the increased stopping distance required by the large
vehicles.
Acceleration and Agility
Large vehicles accelerate very slowly and cannot make maneuvers as quickly as
other vehicles.
•
Drivers of large vehicles should shift to an appropriate lower gear before
descending a steep hill to minimize the possibility of overheating the brakes.
•
Drivers must be aware that large vehicles may be travelling at a speed less than
the posted speed limit and should use caution when approaching or passing.
Downgrade Speed Control
The continuous application of brakes to control speed on downgrades will cause the
brakes to become ineffective. This condition is more dangerous with large vehicles.
•
Drivers of large vehicles should shift to an appropriate lower gear before
descending a steep hill to minimize the possibilty of overheating the brakes.
•
The drivers of other vehicles should be alert to overtaking large vehicles; move
out of their way.
Slipstream
Large fast-moving vehicles cause wind gusts with a force great enough to cause 
direction changes in smaller vehicles. Drivers of smaller vehi-cles should be prepared 
to take proper corrective steering action when approaching or passing large vehicles 
that are moving at or near maximum speeds.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Many times large trucks carry material that is dangerous to persons or property.
This material may be explosive, flammable, radioactive, poisonous, etc. Drivers of
these vehicles are responsible for insuring that these materials are properly packaged
and marked and that the vehicle is marked to indicate the type of material carried so
that proper protective action can be taken in case of an accident.
86
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
Most large vehicles are required to carry emergency equipment such as fire extin-
guishers, flares, emergency reflectors, first aid kits, etc. Drivers of these vehicles must
know what equipment is required and how and when to use it.
TOWING TRAILERS
Many passenger car and small truck drivers tow trailers of various types with their
vehicles. You will find that many of the limitations that apply to large vehicles also
apply when you are towing a trailer; particularly large trailers.
Rear-View Mirrors
If your trailer is large enough to obstruct your view through your inside rear-view
mirror, you must have outside rear-view mirrors of proper size on both sides of your
car.
Brakes
If your loaded trailer weighs more than half the weight of the towing vehicle or is
3,000 pounds or more, the trailer must be equipped with brakes, and breakaway pro-
tection.
Passengers
You should not permit passengers to ride in trailers. Riding in house trailers is pro-
hibited.
Safety Chains
Your trailer must be equipped with safety chains. Safety chains must be attached
to the frame of the towing vehicle and the trailer and not connected to a part of the
trailer hitch.
87
88
Trailer Hitches
Insure that your vehicle is equipped with a proper hitch for the size and type of
trailer being towed. Large trailers require special hitches. Don’t rely on bumper hitch-
es for any trailer.
Trailer Load
Insure that the trailer load is properly balanced. About 10% to 15% of the trailer
weight should be on the vehicle’s trailer hitch. If the weight is too great, you will have
difficulty steering the vehicle. If the weight is too small, the trailer will “fishtail.”
Don’t overload the trailer.
Be sure that the load is held securely in place.
Equipment
Insure that the trailer has:
•
Wheels properly mounted and lubricated, and covered with fenders or mud
guards.
•
Good tires properly inflated.
•
Tail, stop, turn signal, license plate, and, if required, side marker lamps and
reflectors.
Insufficient weight on
hitch causes a trailer to
“fishtail.”
Do not overload trailer.
89
MOTORISTS AND MOTORCYCLES IN TRAFFIC
SHARING THE ROAD WITH MOTORCYCLES
Today’s motorcycle riders are friends, relatives, and neighbors, but many car driv-
ers still have not adjusted to motorcycles appearing in traffic. Travelling by motorcy-
cle is appealing to some people; they are fuel and space efficient and can be just plain
fun to ride. But there is a flip side: motorcyclists are more vulnerable to injury than a
car driver if involved in an accident. Research shows that over two-thirds of the
car/motorcycle accidents are the result of a car driver turning in front of the motorcy-
clist. Motorcycles and cars need to mix in traffic without causing harm to each other.
To do so, we need to understand more about motorcycles, and why riders do some of
the things they do.
90
SIZE
Motorcycles present a narrow silhouette and are usually much shorter in length
than an automobile. The small profile of the motorcycle may make it appear farther
away and travelling slower than it actually is. Because it is difficult to judge the motor-
cycle’s distance and speed, car drivers need to take a second look, and then a third. Its
small size also makes it more difficult to spot in traffic than another car. Some motor-
cycles take advantage of their small size and maneuverability. They may cut between
cars and put themselves in places where drivers cannot see them. Be alert for a motor-
cycle to appear unexpectedly.
MAKE SURE YOU SEE THE MOTORCYCLE AND KNOW ITS SPEED
BEFORE YOU START TO TURN OR ENTER AN INTERSECTION.
LANE POSITION
Because of a motorcycle’s size, its position within a lane of traffic will change as
traffic conditions change. The motorcyclist will position himself in the lane to see and
be seen. Often, this means riding in the left portion of the traffic lane to allow a bet-
ter view of some traffic and road situations. It also makes the motorcycle more visi-
ble to other traffic. However, as traffic and road conditions change, the rider may
move. This move could be
to the center of the lane or
even to the right side to
avoid traffic or to be seen
by others on the road.
Most drivers take for
granted the ability of their
automobile 
to 
handle
minor road hazards such
as potholes or railroad
tracks. Minor problems for
the four-wheeled vehicle
can be major problems for
motorcycles. The cyclist
will change position with-
in the lane to increase the
distance from potential hazards. These lateral movements sometimes occur suddenly.
Motorists need to be alert for these sudden changes in position and direction, and drive
accordingly. Respect the vehicle space of a motorcycle and its position in traffic.
Motorcycles are allowed the full width of a lane in which to maneuver. Refrain from
sharing a lane with a motorcyclist. It restricts the rider’s ability to avoid hazardous sit-
uations.
91
92
INTERSECTIONS
Intersections are the most likely places for car/motorcycle collisions to occur.
As stated earlier, this usually is the result of a car driver NOT SEEING the motorcycle
and turning into the motorcycle’s path. Misinterpreting a rider’s intentions can also
lead to problems. A cyclist will change lane position to prepare for upcoming traffic
conditions. The rider will move to one side of the lane in preparation for a turn or pos-
sibly to move away from a hazard unseen by other motorists. Do not assume the
rider’s intention until the maneuver is unmistakably started, such as a turn into an
intersection or driveway. Also, turn signals do not automatically shut off on a motor-
cycle and riders occasionally forget to cancel them after a turn is completed. Make
sure you know what the rider is going to do before you move into the motorcycle’s
path.
93
FOLLOWING DISTANCE
When driving behind a motorcycle, allow at least a 2-second following distance.
This provides the cyclist enough room to maneuver or stop in an emergency. Due to
its vulnerable nature and the difficulty motorists have in judging a motorcycle’s speed
and distance, space between the two vehicles should be increased to avoid sudden
braking. Both riders and drivers are more likely to make incorrect decisions if there is
not enough stopping distance or ability to see and react to conditions. This leads to
accidents. A rider’s chance of injury is greater if forced to avoid obstacles ahead, as
well as a driver following too closely.
PASSING AND BEING PASSED
The rules for passing other vehicles are similar for motorcycles. The motorist
being overtaken by a cycle should maintain lane position and speed. Allow the cyclist
to complete the pass and assume proper lane position as quickly as possible. When
passing a motorcycle, allow a full lane to the motorcycle. Never crowd into the same
lane as the cycle. Returning to the original lane too soon can force a rider to swerve
to the right into traffic or off the road.
OPERATOR’S LICENSE
Motorcycles are different to operate than an automobile; they require special
knowledge and skills. It only makes sense that a motorcycle operator license be
required. Most states now have a separate knowledge and skill test that must be com-
pleted for motorcycle operation. Passing both tests qualifies the rider for a license
allowing motorcycle operation. Also, motorcycles must be registered and insured to
the same standards as an automobile.
What all this means is, motorcycles are a full partner in the traffic mix and must 
be treated with respect and courtesy. Watch for the unexpected and give them 
their share of the road; a rider may be the neighbor next door.
94
95
CHAPTER XII
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
SUMMARY OF FACTS
•
In Hawaii 20% of all traffic fatalities are pedestrians.
•
Most of those killed are non-drivers.
•
Almost half of those fatally injured are under age 15 or over age 65.
•
Almost 90% of the fatal accidents occur in the roadway; over 50% while cross-
ing the roadway.
•
Only slightly more than 10% of the fatalities occur off the roadway.
Upon reviewing this summary it is obvious that the roadway is the domain of the
motor vehicle. A pedestrian entering the roadway has no physical protection against
the motor vehicle. His safety depends entirely upon his and the driver’s alertness and
actions.
The summary also shows that accidents happen most often to the young and the
elderly. Children are quick and see well but they are not familiar with traffic and
underestimate the danger and destructive force of a motor vehicle. Older persons are
often handicapped by poor vision, slow reaction time, the inability to move fast, and
are more easily injured or killed.
To reduce or eliminate your chances of becoming involved in Hawaii’s pedestrian
accident statistics, put the following rules into practice when you DRIVE and when
you WALK:
Your Responsibility as a DRIVER
•
Slow down and be prepared to stop whenever you see persons walking on or
crossing the roadway and whenever you observe children near the roadway.
Sound your horn, as necessary, to give warning to any pedestrian upon a road-
way. (Required by law)
•
Stop for all blind persons in the roadway (identified by a white cane or guide
dog) regardless of the traffic signal indication or traffic situation.
•
Never drive through a pedestrian safety zone. (Prohibited by law)
•
Never pass a vehicle stopped to allow a pedestrian to cross the street.
(Prohibited by law)
•
Be especially watchful for children near schools, parks, playgrounds and in res-
idential areas. Stop upon the signal of any school crossing guard.
•
Watch for pedestrians when turning at intersections and when entering or leav-
ing driveways. (Required by law)
•
Look for approaching vehicles before you or your passengers alight from your
vehicle. Get out of your vehicle on the side away from traffic whenever possible.
Your Responsibility as a Pedestrian
•
Cross only at crosswalks. Jaywalking is illegal.
•
Obey all traffic laws and signals. (Required by law)
•
Watch for cars at all times when you are walking in the roadway. Don’t assume
that the lines on the pavement or the traffic signals guarantee your safety.
•
Never start across the street on a green light that has been showing for some
time. Wait for the green signal on the next cycle.
96
•
Never enter the street or crosswalk when there are vehicles approaching close
by. They may not be able to stop. (Prohibited by law)
•
Look for turning vehicles before crossing the street.
•
Never run alongside of or across a street.
•
Walk on the left side of the street facing oncoming traffic.
•
Do not walk or stand upon the travelled portion of the roadway to solicit for any
reason or to guard a vehicle or parking place. (Prohibited by law)
•
Wear bright colored clothing when walking on or alongside the roadway.
•
Do not walk on or near the road if you are under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
•
Insure that your children do not play in the street.
STOPPING FOR A SCHOOL BUS
Whenever a school bus is stopped on a highway with alternating red signal lamps 
flashing, the driver of any motor vehicle on the same highway in the lane occupied by 
the school bus and all lanes adjacent to the lane occupied by the school bus shall stop 
the driver’s vehicle before reaching the school bus and shall not proceed until the 
school bus resumes motion or the flashing red signal lamps are turned off. Failure to 
comply with this law (291C-95, HRS) can cost you $1,000.
However, vehicles proceeding in the opposite direction on a divided highway are
not required to stop. A divided highway is two roadways separated by a strip of land
or other space not intended for vehicular travel.
Motorists travelling at the time school buses make their runs should be on the alert.
The presence of school children waiting along the roadway in the morning indicates
a school bus is in the area. In addition, there is a possibility of waiting children dart-
ing in front of traffic.
97
CHAPTER XIII
BICYCLES
MOTORISTS
As our roads and highways become more crowded, it is increasingly important to safely 
share the road with bicyclists. Bicycles are legally considered vehicles, and as such have all 
of the rights and responsibilities that other vehicles have. However, motorists should be extra 
alert for bicyclists because they are often not as easy to see as other vehicles. In addition, 
they may ride unpredictably, or not have the knowledge or skills to ride in traffic. You will 
see a wide range of riding ability among bicyclists. Drivers should be alert for the 
following:
•
Bicyclists swerving into the travel lane. Although bicyclists are required to ride as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable, there are exceptions when
the bicyclist moves into the lane. These include preparing to make a left turn, pass-
ing another bicycle or avoiding an obstacle in the edge of the road. Bicyclists may
legally ride on the left-hand edge of a one-way road.
•
Bicyclists riding the wrong way. Although it is illegal to ride against traffic, many
inexperienced bicyclists ride this way at times. This behavior leads to approximately
25% of all bicycle-car crashes. Drivers should be on the lookout for this behavior
especially when turning.
•
Exercise care when passing a bicyclist. Motorists should maintain at least 3 feet of
space between the bicyclist and their vehicle until they have safely passed. Also, the
bicyclist may be moving faster than you think. A significant number of crashes occur
when a motorist passes a bicyclist, and immediately slows down and turns right,
without leaving enough space for the bicyclist.
•
Remain clear of bike lanes, especially when making a right turn at an intersection.
Look for and yield to bicyclists when crossing bike lanes. If you plan to make an
immediate right turn, it is better not to pass the bicyclist. Train yourself to look for
overtaking bicyclists every time you make a right turn even when you think there is
no bicyclist around.
•
Look before you open your car door. It is a traffic violation to open a car door unex-
pectedly so as to create a hazard for moving traffic, including bicyclists.
•
Treat bicyclists with aloha. Each bicycle on the road means one fewer car on the road,
that much less pollution and potentially one more open parking space at your desti-
nation.
BICYCLISTS
Like motorists, bicyclists are required to obey all traffic signs, signals and other traffic reg-
ulations. It is the law, but it also goes a long way in gaining respect for bicyclists and show-
ing that they belong on the road. In addition bicyclists should be aware of the following:
Traffic Regulations
•
Always ride with traffic, even if you are riding a short distance.
Motorists are not looking for fast-moving bicyclists coming from 
the “wrong” direction. When making a right turn, it is not un-
common both for motorists and bicyclists to be so preoccupied 
with searching for traffic coming from the left that they forget to 
check for pedestrians coming from their right.
98
•
When travelling slower than the normal speed of traffic, ride as close to the right edge
as practicable. On one-way roads, it is legal to ride on the left edge.
•
Bicyclists may move into the travelway when making a left turn, avoiding hazards in
the roadway, moving the same speed as traffic or if it is too narrow for a bicycle and
motor vehicle to safely share a lane.
•
On the roadway, bicyclists must ride single file. They may ride two abreast on a bicy-
cle lane or path if it is wide enough not to impede traffic.
•
Obey all traffic signs and signals. Bicyclists caught vio-
lating traffic laws are subject to the same penalties as
drivers.
•
Follow lane markings. Move out of a right-turn-only lane
if you are going straight through.
•
If you ride at night you must have a headlight and rear
reflector. A rear light and pedal reflectors are recom-
mended, as well as light-colored clothing.
•
Don’t carry passengers unless the bicycle is equipped to
do so.
•
Bicycles are not allowed to ride on the sidewalk in busi-
ness districts. In other areas, bicyclists may ride on the
sidewalks provided they stay at 10 MPH or less and
always yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
Safety Tips
•
Wear a bicycle helmet every time you ride. Although you may not be legally required
to wear a helmet, it is a good idea. You don’t have to be going fast or far to risk seri-
ous head injuries.
•
Be predictable. Don’t do anything that would surprise drivers, such as swerve in and
out of parked cars or traffic.
•
Look behind you, and make sure it is clear, before making a left turn or moving into
the travelway. Also, let motorists know what you are doing by using proper hand sig-
nals for turning and stopping.
•
Don’t ride too close to parked cars. Leave at least 3 feet so that if the driver suddenly
opens the door you won’t be hit. Also be alert for cars that may be pulling out into the
road.
•
Don’t wear headphones when riding. You need to hear the traffic around you and be
alert to what is going on. This includes watching the road for potholes, broken pave-
ment and slippery surfaces.
•
Make sure your bicycle is safe. Before you ride make sure the brakes work, the seat
and handlebars are tight and the tires are properly inflated and in good shape.
•
Be visible. Wear bright-colored clothes when you ride. Do not assume that drivers see
you, even if you make eye contact. Elicit a response from the driver, so you are sure
that you are seen.
•
Choose the best way to turn left. Experienced bicyclists will make a left turn like a
motor vehicle: signal, move into the center of the lane turning left when it is safe to
do so and complete the turn. Others may opt to cross like a pedestrian: ride to the
crosswalk, walk their bicycle across the intersection, continue riding from there.
•
Don’t pass vehicles on the right. Drivers may not expect or see you when you ride pass
them on the right. When stopped in traffic, it is safer and more courteous to take your
place in line.
GENERAL DRIVING
TEST QUESTIONS
99
100
GENERAL TEST QUESTIONS
1.
When you take a road test for a driver’s license:
1. You must provide the vehicle.
2. The vehicle must be in safe operating condition free of safe-
ty defects.
3. You must be accompanied to the testing station by a licensed
driver.
4. All of the above.
2.
When you change your address you must notify the County
Examiner of drivers:
1. In writing, within 30 days.
2. In writing, within 10 days.
3. In person, within 10 days.
4. By telephone, within 30 days.
3.
When you change your name you must notify the County
Examiner of drivers in person with proof of the change within:
1. 60 days.
2. 20 days.
3. 10 days.
4. 30 days.
4.
When driving a vehicle upon any public street or highway you must:
1. Show your driver’s license upon demand.
2. Carry your license with you.
3. Have a valid driver’s license.
4. All of the above.
5.
When your driver’s license expires you may:
1. Drive during the grace period of 90 days.
2. Drive as long as you are accompanied by a licensed driver.
3. You may not drive but you may renew your driver’s license
within a year after the expiration following normal license
renewal steps.
4. Drive to and from work only.
6.
All head lamps on your vehicle must work properly and be cor-
rectly adjusted:
1. When driving in city traffic.
2. At all times.
3. When driving on freeways.
4. When approaching other vehicles.
7.
Which of the following equipment may you have installed on
your private vehicle?
1. A red light showing the front, or a blue light visible outside
of the vehicle.
2. A bell, exhaust whistle or siren.
3. A muffler cut-out or by pass if used only on country roads.
4. None of the above.
Ref. Pg.
15
16
16
17
15
19
18
101
8.
A copy of the vehicle inspection certificate:
1. Should be kept in the vehicle.
2. Filed with your State income tax return.
3. Be kept in a safe place in the home
4. Will be sent to you by the County Department of Finance.
9.
The mechanical condition of the vehicle is the responsibility of:
1. The legal owner of the vehicle.
2. The garage mechanic.
3. The vehicle driver and registered owner of the vehicle.
4. The insurance company.
10.
A leaky exhaust system in your vehicle is dangerous because it
can cause:
1. A loss of hearing.
2. Pollution.
3. Carbon monoxide poisoning.
4. Poor engine performance.
11.
The agencies responsible for Vehicle Registration and Licensing
are:
1. The County Police Departments.
2. The County Departments of Public Works.
3. The State Department of Transportation.
4. The different county agencies.
12.
When you as a registered owner of a vehicle change your
address from that shown on the registration certificate you:
1. Must notify the County Department of Finance when renew-
ing the license.
2. Must notify the County Department of Finance within 30
days after the change.
3. Must make the change only when selling or trading the car.
4. Do not have to do anything.
13.
The most important thing in any driving situation is:
1. The vehicle.
2. The environment (the highway and traffic).
3. The driver (you).
4. The time of day.
14.
The boss chews you out just before quitting time. You don’t say
much, but you think he is unfair and you are angry! When you
get to your car you should:
1. Play the radio loud so you won’t think about it.
2. Drive fast on the Interstate so you can let off steam.
3. Take a few minutes to cool off before you drive home.
4. Stop in at your favorite bar and have a few drinks before
driving home.
Ref. Pg.
18
19
20
21
21
24
24
102
15. As a driver, you may be challenged by other drivers to demon-
strate your driving capabilities and your vehicle’s capabilities on
the highway. You should:
1. Resist the desire to exhibit and compete.
2. Decline all challenges to prove you or your vehicle’s capa-
bilities.
3. Take on only those challenges which you know you can safely
win.
4. Both 1 and 2 above.
16. To insure that your physical condition does not cause you to
drive in an unsafe manner you should:
1. Keep physically fit and have regular physical examinations.
2. Know the effect of any medicine on your driving ability.
3. Drive within your physical limitations.
4. All of the above.
17. A police officer directing traffic directs you to go through a red
light, what should you do?
1.
Stop, and then go.
3. Go on as directed.
2. Wait for the green light.
4. Make a right turn.
18. Which of the following influences your driving actions most?
1. Your height.
3. Your attitude towards driving.
2. Your age.
4. Your reaction time.
19. Traffic signs and pavement markings must be:
1. Always obeyed.
2. Used as a guide only.
3. Followed only when there is other traffic.
4. Followed only when a police officer is present.
20. You are driving on a narrow road and you meet an oncoming
vehicle. You must:
1. Pull completely off the road and stop.
2. Allow the on-coming vehicle at least one-half of the main
travelled portion of the road.
3. Make the other vehicle pull over as you were there first.
4. Turn on your headlights to make sure the other vehicle sees you.
21. You are passing a car when you see the sign on the picture. You
should:
1. Speed up and finish passing as soon as you can.
2. Pass on the right.
3. Drop back and pass after the intersection if it’s safe.
4. Stay beside the car until passing the intersection.
Ref. Pg.
25
25
26
24
26
26
26
103
22. You are following the slow moving vehicle in the picture on a
two lane road. You may:
1. Not pass the vehicle.
2. Pass on the left if no traffic is coming.
3. Pass on the right using the paved shoulder.
4. None of the above.
23. You are driving on a street marked for one-way traffic. You may
pass the vehicle in the picture:
1. On the left only.
2. On the right only.
3. On either the right or the left.
4. You must always use the lane fur-
thest to the left to pass.
24. When turning or changing lanes you must:
1. Always signal your intentions even when there is no traffic
visible.
2. Signal only if there is traffic.
3. Signal only when driving at night.
4. Signal only when driving in traffic at night.
25. You are coming to a railroad crossing and the crossing signals
are flashing. You should:
1. Stop and look for a train.
2. Slow down and look for a train.
3. Look for a train, then speed up.
4. Do what the approaching vehicle does.
26. You must not drive your vehicle at a speed greater than:
1. The posted maximum speed limit.
2. A speed that is greater than is reasonable and prudent.
3. A speed that is safe for existing conditions.
4. All of the above.
27. When you leave your vehicle unattended, you must:
1. Stop the engine.
2. Lock the ignition and remove the ignition key.
3. Set the parking brake.
4. All of the above.
28. You are driving on the roadway and hear a siren behind you. You
should:
1. Stop.
2. Pull over to the right and stop.
3. Speed up to get out of the way.
4. Slow down.
Ref. Pg.
29
68
27
27
28
29
29
104
29. You are driving on the roadway and there is an emergency vehi-
cle with siren and flashing lights directly behind you. You are in
heavy traffic and cannot get out of the way. You should:
1. Stop.
2. Blow your horn.
3. Force your way into traffic in the adjoining lane.
4. Keep moving slowly until you can get out of the way.
30. You may pass another vehicle:
1. On a curve or a hill because the chance is small that another
vehicle is coming.
2. On the shoulder of the highway.
3. When there is a solid yellow line in your lane if it’s clear
ahead.
4. None of the above.
31. You may pass a school bus from the front or rear on an undivid-
ed roadway:
1. Never.
2. When the red lamps on the school bus are flashing.
3. When the red lamps on the school bus are not flashing.
4. At anytime, if you go slow.
32. An intersection has no traffic signs or signals. You arrive at the
same time as another vehicle. You should:
1. Speed up and get through the intersection.
2. Slow down and yield to the vehicle on the right.
3. Drive into the intersection and make the other vehicle stop.
4. Honk your horn and drive through the intersection.
33. You are coming to this intersection. You should:
1. Stop.
2. Slow down, stop if necessary and let all other
crossing vehicles go first.
3. Speed up to clear the intersection.
4. Keep going as the sign is for the other vehicle.
34. You are coming to this intersection. You should:
1. Slow down and look for other vehicles.
2. Come to a complete stop and let all crossing traf-
fic go.
3. Stop only if there are other vehicles coming.
4. Stop only if you are going to make a left turn.
Ref. Pg.
29
30
&
31
31
32
32
32
105
35.
You are coming to an intersection and have a green light.
Pedestrians are crossing against the red. You should:
1. Honk your horn.
2. Speed up and pass in front of the pedestrians.
3. Stop to let the pedestrians cross safely.
4. Drive close and frighten the pedestrians so they’ll think twice
before crossing against a red light.
36.
When you drive into the street from any driveway you:
1. Must drive slowly so approaching vehicles and pedestrians
can get out of your way.
2. Must honk the horn so approaching vehicles and pedestrians
can allow you room.
3. Must stop and proceed only when there are no pedestrians or
vehicles approaching.
4. Can disregard pedestrians if there is no sidewalk.
37.
You and another vehicle are approaching an intersection that has
no traffic signs or signals. Which vehicle has the right of way?
1. The vehicle on the left.
2. The vehicle on the right.
3. The vehicle with the greatest speed.
4. The vehicle that enters the intersection first.
38.
When turning left at an intersection or into any driveway you:
1. Should leave room on the right for other vehicles to pass.
2. Must yield to vehicles approaching closely from the opposite
direction.
3. Must not cross any solid yellow line.
4. Must not block vehicles approaching from the rear.
39.
You are stopped behind other vehicles waiting at a stop sign.
When the intersection is clear:
1. You may proceed through the intersection without stopping
again.
2. You must stop again at the stop sign or stop line.
3. You may go through the intersection slowly without stopping
if there is no other traffic.
4. You may follow the vehicle ahead without stopping again.
40.
You are driving on a divided multi-lane highway when you see
or hear the signal of an approaching emergency vehicle. You
should:
1. Disregard the signal if there are other lanes available for the
emergency vehicle.
2. Stop as quickly as you can.
3. Slow down, move your vehicle to provide a clear path for the
emergency vehicle and stop.
4. Increase your speed to provide a clear path for the emergency
vehicle.
Ref. Pg.
32
&
40
32
32
32
44
29
106
41. A vehicle using emergency signals is approaching from the
opposite direction on a two-lane street or highway. You should:
1. Stop as quickly as you can.
2. Slow down, move as far to the right as possible and stop.
3. Disregard the emergency vehicle as it is going the other way.
4. None of the above.
42. On a two-lane street your vehicle is being followed by a fire
engine that is not using emergency signals. You should:
1. Continue to drive in a normal manner.
2. Stop as quickly as you can.
3. Speed up to get out of the way.
4. Slow down, move as far to the right as possible and stop.
43. Certain highway signs and markings require that you must obey
the indicated instruction. Such signs are known as:
1. Regulatory signs.
3. Information signs.
2. Warning signs.
4. Guide signs.
44. Certain highway signs and markings contain information about
hazardous conditions. Such signs are known as:
1. Regulatory signs.
3. Information signs.
2. Warning signs.
4. Guide signs.
45. You are turning onto a two-lane road divided by a broken yellow
line. You know immediately that:
1. You are on a two-way road.
2. You are on a one-way road.
3. That the road is under repair.
4. That you must stay to the left of the broken yellow lines.
46. You are driving on a highway divided by two solid yellow lines.
You know that:
1. You may cross these lines only to make a left turn into or
from an alley, private road or a driveway.
2. You may cross these lines to pass other vehicles only if there
is no on-coming traffic.
3. You may never cross these lines.
4. You may cross these lines only to make a U-turn.
47. You are driving and have started to pass the other car. You
should:
1. Speed up and pass as soon as possible.
2. Slam on your brakes.
3. Slow down and move into the right lane behind the other car.
4. Stay in the left lane until passing the intersection.
Ref. Pg.
29
29
33
33
33
33
26
&
33
107
48. You are driving on a four-lane divided highway. You should
know that:
1. White lane lines separate lanes of traffic moving in the same
direction.
2. White lane lines separate lanes of traffic moving in the oppo-
site direction.
3. Yellow lane lines separate lanes of traffic moving in the same
direction.
4. None of the above.
49. You are driving on a four-lane divided highway. The traffic lanes
are indicated by a solid white line. You should know that:
1. The solid white line may not be crossed.
2. The solid white line may be crossed at any time.
3. The solid white line may be crossed only in unusual circum-
stances and then only with great care.
4. The solid white line separates traffic moving in opposite
directions.
50. You are driving on a four-lane highway. You should know that a
double solid white line:
1. May not be crossed.
2. May be crossed only with great care.
3. Is used to separate traffic moving in the opposite direction.
4. Are never used on highways.
51. Edgelines are solid           or           lines along the edges of the
roadway to be used as a safety guide to mark the limits of the
travelled roadway.
1. Yellow; white.
3. Orange; white.
2. Red; white.
4. Green; white.
Ref. Pg.
34
34
35
35
108
52. Stop lines are solid white lines painted across the traffic lanes
at
and
indicating the exact place at which to stop.
1. Curves; hills.
2. Churches; schools.
3. Intersections; pedestrian crosswalks.
4. Freeway on ramps; fire stations.
53. Crosswalk lines are two solid white lines painted across the traf-
fic lanes. As a driver you should know that:
1. Motor vehicles have the right of way over pedestrians in
these crosswalks.
2. When pedestrians are in these crosswalks, they have the right
of way over motor vehicles.
3. No one has the right of way in a crosswalk.
4. Pedestrians are responsible to keep out of the way of all traffic.
54. You are driving on a multi-lane roadway. The center lane is
formed by a combination of yellow solid and dashed lines as
shown in the picture. You as a driver should know:
1. That this marked lane is used for passing only.
2. That this marked lane is used only for left turns by traffic
travelling in either direction.
3. That this marked lane is a pedestrian safety zone.
4. That this marked lane is used for truck and bus traffic only.
55. Obstruction markings are solid white or yellow lines painted in
the traffic lanes to guide you around obstructions in the road. As
a driver you should know:
1. You may pass to either side of white obstruction markings.
2. You may pass to either side of yellow obstruction markings.
3. Both 1 and 2 above.
4. None of the above.
56. The painted markings in the picture mean that:
1. Vehicles from both lanes can go straight or turn right.
2. Vehicles in the left lane must go straight, and vehicles in the
right lane can go straight or turn right.
3. The signs are just advisory.
4. Vehicles in the left lane may go straight or turn left and vehi-
cles in the right lane must turn right.
Ref. Pg.
36
36
36
37
37
109
57. A red traffic signal light means that you must:
1. Stop at the stop line.
2. When there is no stop line, stop before entering any cross-
walk.
3. Where there is no stop line or crosswalk, stop before enter-
ing the intersection.
4. All of the above.
58. A stopped vehicle facing a circular red traffic light may if not
prohibited by a traffic sign:
1. Turn right after yielding to other traffic and pedestrians.
2. It is illegal to turn right on red.
3. Turn right at any time.
4. Turn right only after blowing the horn.
59. A stopped vehicle facing a circular red traffic light may turn left
if not prohibited by a traffic sign:
1. When there is no other traffic or pedestrians.
2. Never.
3. Only right turns on red are permitted in Hawaii.
4. After yielding to pedestrians and traffic, when turning from a
one-way street into another one-way street.
60. A steady circular yellow light on a traffic signal means:
1. You should speed up to beat the red light.
2. That a red light is going to be shown immediately thereafter.
3. You should avoid entering the intersection if possible.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
61. A circular green traffic light means:
1. That you always have the right of way.
2. That you may go straight ahead or turn, except where signs
prohibit turns.
3. Traffic and pedestrians already in the intersection must get
out of your way.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
62. Lighted arrows are sometimes used to control turns from a spe-
cific lane. A red arrow:
1. Is never used as a traffic signal.
2. Means the same as a circular red light for the indicated lane
of traffic.
3. Means that you may go in the direction indicated by the
arrow.
4. Means that the traffic the arrow is pointing toward must stop.
Ref. Pg.
39
39
39
39
40
40
63. Lighted arrows are sometimes used to control turns from a spe-
cific traffic lane. A yellow arrow:
1. Is never used as a traffic signal.
2. Means the same as a circular yellow light for the indicated
lane of traffic.
3. Means that you may go in the direction indicated by the
arrow.
4. Is warning the traffic a green arrow is about to be shown.
64. Lighted arrows are sometimes used to control turns from a spe-
cific traffic lane. A green arrow:
1. Is used only on one-way streets.
2. Means the same as a circular green light, but you must go
only in the direction the arrow indicates.
3. Means that you may go only if the green arrow is accompa-
nied by a green light.
4. Points the way to the airport.
65. A red flashing signal means the same as a:
1. Red light.
3. Yield sign.
2. Stop sign.
4. Caution sign.
66. You are approaching a flashing red signal at this intersection.
You should:
1. Come to a complete stop. Check the traffic and go when it is
safe.
2. Slow down and yield the right of way.
3. Stop only if turning left.
4. Be prepared to stop.
67. The yellow flashing signal in the picture means:
1. That the roadway ends.
2. That you must stop.
3. That you may proceed only with caution.
4. That you must stop for cross traffic.
68. A lighted red “X” over a traffic lane means:
1. That you may use that lane.
2. That you may not use that lane.
3. That the lane is for traffic coming toward you.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
110
Ref. Pg.
40
40
41
41
41
41
111
69. A lighted green arrow over the traffic lane means:
1. That you may use that lane.
2. That you may not use that lane.
3. That the lane is for traffic coming toward you.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
70. A yellow “X” over the traffic lane means:
1. That you must move out of that lane of traffic because it is
going to be used for on-coming traffic.
2. That you may use that lane.
3. That the lane is for left turns only.
4. That you may use the lane but with caution.
71. Pedestrian signals consist of the lighted words “WALK” and
“DON’T WALK” and the symbols of a walking person and an
upraised palm. A steady “DON’T WALK” or upraised palm sig-
nal means:
1. Pedestrians must not enter the roadway toward the signal.
2. Pedestrians already in the intersection facing the signal may
continue to the nearest sidewalk, traffic island or safety zone.
3. Pedestrians already in the intersection facing the signal must
run to the nearest sidewalk.
4. Both 1 and 2 above.
72. This is a “reduced speed ahead” sign. You as a driver should know:
1. That you should maintain your vehicle’s speed till you
get to the slower speed zone.
2. That you should begin to reduce your vehicle’s speed.
3. That it’s dangerous to slow down because traffic starts
to back up.
4. That the sign is only there for poke-along drivers.
73. While driving you come upon a sign which says, “reduced speed
35 MPH”. You as a driver should know:
1. That the new 35 MPH speed zone begins at this sign.
2. That the new 35 MPH speed zone begins at the next “speed
limit” sign.
3. That you have plenty of time to slow down before the speed
zone.
4. That the sign is put there to harass “good” drivers.
74. This is a “do not pass” sign. You as a driver should know:
1. That you must not pass another vehicle where these
signs are posted.
2. That you may pass a slow moving vehicle here if you
can pass quickly.
3. That it’s all right to pass here if you “know the road
ahead.”
4. That it’s all right to pass here at night when the head-
lights of on-coming traffic can be seen.
Ref. Pg.
40
42
42
45
45
45
112
75. This sign means:
1. No U turn.
2. U turn permitted.
3. Winding road.
4. Sharp left turn.
76. This sign means:
1. No right turn.
2. Right turn permitted.
3. Stop before turning right.
4. Sharp curve ahead.
77. This sign means:
1. Stop.
2. Do not enter.
3. Railroad crossing.
4. Yield.
78. This sign means:
1. Lane signal.
2. Lane closed for traffic.
3. Railroad crossing ahead.
4. Traffic signal ahead.
79. This sign means:
1. One-way traffic.
2. Divided highway ahead.
3. Two-way traffic.
4. Keep left.
80. This sign means:
1. One-way traffic. 
2. Divided highway ends.
3. Two-way traffic.
4. Keep right.
81. This sign means:
1. Trucks only.
2. Trucks entering highway.
3. Hill.
4. Trucks have the right of way.
82. This sign means:
1. Slippery when wet.
2. Watch for drunk drivers.
3. Dangerous curve.
4. Bump in road ahead.
83. This sign means:
1. School.
2. School crossing.
3. Pedestrian crossing.
4. Workmen in road.
Ref. Pg.
46
46
46
48
47
47
47
47
47
113
84. This sign means:
1. Narrow bridge.
2. Lane ends or roadway narrows.
3. Industrial area.
4. Freeway on ramp.
85. This sign means:
1. Library.
2. School crossing.
3. Pedestrian crossing.
4. Children in road.
1. School
2. Library crossing.
3. Pedestrian crossing.
4. Children in road.
87. Persons driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor are:
1. Every driver’s problem whether they drink or not.
2. Only a problem to those who drink.
3. Not a problem in Hawaii.
4. A police enforcement problem only.
88. A few drinks after work before driving home:
1. Is good because you miss the rush traffic.
2. Is good because they help to release the day’s tension and
make you a safer driver.
3. Should be avoided because they may make you a dangerous
driver.
4. Never hurt anyone.
89. Alcoholic beverages will affect you:
1. More rapidly just after eating.
2. More rapidly on an empty stomach.
3. The same way at all times.
4. Only if you have more than two drinks.
90. After the alcohol has entered your blood you can lessen its effect by:
1. Taking a cold shower.
2. Drinking black coffee.
3. Both 1 and 2 above.
4. There is nothing you can do to lessen the effect.
91. A police officer stops you, charges you with driving under the
influence of alcohol, and tells you, you must take a test to deter-
mine the amount of alcohol in your blood. You as the driver:
1. Don’t have to take the test if you can prove you weren’t
drinking.
2. Must take the test or risk losing your driver’s license.
3. Don’t have to take the test if you have not violated any traf-
fic rule.
4. Don’t have to do anything.
Ref. Pg.
47
48
55
55
55
55
56
48
86. This sign means:
zone.
114
92. You have been charged with driving under the influence of alco-
hol, and have refused to take the required test for blood alcohol.
You may lose your driver’s license for twelve months:
1. Only if you are convicted of driving while under the influ-
ence of alcohol.
2. Only if you are convicted of a traffic violation.
3. Because you have refused to take the test.
4. You won’t lose your license.
93. You may drink alcoholic beverages in a vehicle on a public highway:
1. As long as you don’t drive.
2. Only if you ride in the back seat.
3. Only if you ride in the back of a pick-up truck.
4. It is against the law to drink alcoholic beverages on a public
highway.
94. Drugs may interfere with a person’s ability to drive safely:
1. Only if the drugs are prescribed by a doctor.
2. Only when taken while drinking.
3. Only when driving at night.
4. And it is important to ask your doctor about any effects that
the prescribed drugs may have on your driving ability.
95. The consumption of alcohol while taking drugs can:
1. Have a less pronounced effect than either taken separately
and is always safe.
2. Have a more pronounced effect than either taken separately.
3. Help cure your illness.
4. Improve your driving ability.
96. The effect that alcohol has on your reflexes and judgment:
1. Is less if you were only drinking beer.
2. Is less if you were only drinking wine.
3. Is greater if you were drinking whiskey or hard liquor.
4. Depends on the amount of alcohol in your blood stream.
97. When you are driving a vehicle the act of turning your head and
looking before changing lanes, driving away from a curb or exit-
ing your vehicle into traffic is:
1. A bad driving habit.
2. A good driving habit.
3. Unnecessary.
4. Not necessary if you use the rear-view mirror.
98. When you are driving, failing to turn your head to check for traf-
fic before changing lanes, driving away from a curb or exiting
your vehicle in traffic is:
1. All right if you first check the rear-view mirror.
2. A bad driving habit.
3. Many times the cause of a traffic accident.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
Ref. Pg.
56
56
56
56
55
57
57
115
99.
When you are driving, signaling your intentions before turning,
changing lanes or driving away from a curb:
1. Is necessary only if other traffic is present.
2. Is a good driving habit and is required by law.
3. Is necessary only during the maneuver, not before.
4. Is not necessary, if the maneuver is done slowly.
100.
You are driving on a four-lane divided highway, two vehicles are
driving side by side ahead of you, and you are in a hurry. You
should:
1. Drive closely behind the vehicle in the left lane and flash
your headlights.
2. Drive closely behind the vehicle in the right lane.
3. Drive in either lane with at least a two-second time interval
behind the vehicle ahead.
4. Drive closely behind the vehicles ahead changing lanes fre-
quently.
101. You are coming to this intersection, and are planning on turning
right. There is a vehicle close behind you. You should:
1. Signal, slow down, turn right.
2. Signal, come to a complete stop, and turn right when the
intersection is clear of pedestrians and vehicles.
3. Signal, come to a complete stop, wait for a green light, turn
right.
4. Slow down, turn right.
102. When driving in heavy traffic you should:
1. Drive close to the vehicle ahead to keep other vehicles from
cutting in.
2. Drive close to the vehicle ahead being ready for a sudden
stop.
3. Both 1 and 2 above.
4. Keep at least a two-second interval behind the vehicle ahead.
103. You are driving behind another vehicle. You notice that the driver
is driving with one hand, talking to a passenger. You as a driver:
1. Know that you should give the vehicle ahead extra room.
2. Know that the driver in the vehicle ahead is reducing his
safety margin by being an inattentive driver.
3. Know that you should avoid this bad habit.
4. All of the above.
Ref. Pg.
74
67
39
&
57
67
57
&
58
116
104. An inattentive driver is a driver who:
1. Daydreams or gazes at objects off the roadway while driving.
2. Carries on an eye-contact conversation with a passenger
while driving.
3. Restricts his attention to only watching the vehicle ahead.
4. All of the above.
105. An arrogant driver is a driver who:
1. Is purposely in a hurry, competing with other traffic.
2. Shows little or no respect for traffic laws, or the right-of-way
of others.
3. You should try to avoid when driving.
4. All of the above.
106. Defensive driving is a driving technique in which you as a driv-
er:
1. Identify dangerous driving situations and take action to avoid
an accident.
2. Defend against poor drivers by getting ahead of them in traf-
fic.
3. Defend yourself against accidents by following close to the
vehicle ahead.
4. Defend against accidents by driving your vehicle fast enough
to stay ahead of traffic congestion.
107. To practice defensive driving you should:
1. Be aware of developing traffic situations around you.
2. Look well ahead of your vehicle and maintain a proper fol-
lowing distance.
3. Have an alternate plan of action ready. (Always leave your-
self a way out)
4. All of the above.
108. Information you need to drive safely is gained primarily by:
1. Seeing.
2. Talking to yourself.
3. Following other traffic.
4. Turning the radio.
109. Increasing your vehicle’s speed:
1. Increases your field of vision.
2. Decreases your field of vision.
3. Makes it easier to see cross traffic.
4. Has no effect on your field of vision.
110. Your physical and mental condition as a driver:
1. Are not important.
2. Are very important safety factors when driving.
3. Have no effect on your driving ability.
4. Both 1 and 3 above.
Ref. Pg.
57
&
58
58
59
59
59
59
60
117
111. You notice a vehicle defect which may affect the safe operation
of your vehicle. You should:
1. Correct the defect as soon as possible.
2. Correct the defect when you can afford it.
3. Drive the vehicle slower.
4. Not carry passengers until the defect is corrected.
112. You borrow your friend’s vehicle. You have never driven it before.
You should:
1. Drive away, all vehicles are similar.
2. Don’t show your friend that you are unfamiliar with his vehicle.
3. Disregard any obvious defects so as not to embarrass your
friend.
4. Take a few minutes to familiarize yourself with the operation
and location of all the vehicle’s equipment.
113. When driving to an unfamiliar area you:
1. Can depend on road signs to find your way.
2. Should plan your trip.
3. Only have to know generally where your destination is.
4. Should always choose the most direct route.
114. Newer vehicles have equipment warning lamps installed on the
vehicle’s instrument panel. Which of the following statements is
correct?
1. Before the engine is started the lamps should all be illumi-
nated when the ignition switch is first turned on.
2. No lamps should illuminate until the engine is running.
3. The lamps should never illuminate unless there is a malfunc-
tion.
4. The lamps will only illuminate if the head lamps are turned on.
115. Newer vehicles are equipped with a brake warning lamp. This
lamp:
1. Should come on when the parking brake is released.
2. Should not come on when the foot brake pedal is pressed.
3. Should never come on.
4. Indicates that the brake lights are operational.
116. Safety belts are life belts. They:
1. Must be worn at all times when driving or riding in a vehi-
cle.
2. Should be worn only when driving at higher speeds.
3. Should be worn loosely.
4. Need to be worn only if riding in the front seat of the vehicle.
117. The seat belt should be adjusted so that it:
1. Is loose.
2. Is buckled snugly across your hip bones and lower abdomen.
3. Is hidden beneath the seat.
4. Keeps the seat belt buzzer or light from operating.
Ref. Pg.
60
60
60
60
61
61
61
118
118. Small children when riding in a vehicle:
1. May be safely held by a strong adult.
2. Will be safe if standing on the floor in the front or back of an
auto.
3. Will not be hurt in an accident because they are small.
4. Must never be allowed to ride standing on a seat.
119. You are late to work and in a hurry. Before you back into the street:
1. Honk your horn.
2. Check for children and other objects around your car.
3. Always race your engine so that pets will get out of the way.
4. Check for traffic before getting in the vehicle.
120. You are driving forward out of your driveway:
1. You must come to a complete stop before crossing the side-
walk area.
2. You must slow down before crossing the sidewalk area.
3. You have the right of way over pedestrians on a sidewalk
area.
4. If you honk your horn, you can cross the sidewalk area with-
out stopping.
121. You are driving on a multi-lane highway and wish to change
lanes. You must signal your intentions:
1. Immediately before changing lanes.
2. Only when actually changing lanes.
3. At least 50 feet before beginning to change lanes.
4. At least 100 feet before beginning to change lanes.
122. You are driving on a four-lane highway. A slow moving vehicle is
in your lane. Traffic is moderate. Before changing lanes you must:
1. Signal your intentions for at least 100 feet.
2. Make sure your blindspot is clear.
3. Make sure that there is sufficient room in traffic to make the
move. (Never violate other traffics two-second interval)
4. All of the above.
123. Following too closely is listed as the cause of many traffic acci-
dents. To avoid this type of accident, the proper interval for fol-
lowing is:
1. Close enough so no one will cut in front of you.
2. Found by spacing your vehicle at least 2 seconds behind the
vehicle ahead.
3. 100 feet.
4. 75 feet.
124. You are driving and it begins to rain. You should:
1. Drive faster than other traffic.
2. Drive at least the speed limit.
3. Slow down and allow for weather conditions.
4. Drive close behind the vehicle ahead.
Ref. Pg.
61
64
64
65
65
&
66
67
75
119
125. When driving along sharp curves and steep hills of mountain
roads you should:
1. Always allow an approaching vehicle at least one half of the
paved surface.
2. Use a lower gear to control speed while going down long
steep hills.
3. Stay close to the right edge of the road.
4. All of the above.
126. When you approach a vehicle that has just stopped in a parked
position, you should:
1. Assume that the driver will open the door as you approach.
2. Speed up.
3. Slam on your brakes.
4. Assume that the driver will wait till you pass before opening
his door.
127. You are stopped at an intersection and the traffic ahead is
stopped. You have a green light. You should:
1. Drive into the intersection as far as you can.
2. Wait until there is space for your entire vehicle on the oppo-
site side of the intersection before proceeding.
3. Honk your horn.
4. Drive part way into the intersection.
128. Traffic regulations require that you display a turn signal for at
least              feet before making every turn or lane change.
1. 50 feet.
3. 100 feet.
2. 75 feet.
4. 25 feet.
129. Hazard warning signals (4-way flash) are intended to warn other
drivers that a vehicle is in a hazardous position on the roadway.
The signal should be used when:
1. Driving through a tunnel.
2. Driving a heavy truck or bus up a hill.
3. Performing emergency vehicle maintenance on the road
shoulder.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
130. When signaling to make a turn or lane change you should:
1. Signal only while making the turn or lane change.
2. Signal every time you intend to make a turn or lane change.
3. Know that after signaling for 100 feet that you have the right
to make the turn or lane change.
4. All of the above are correct.
Ref. Pg.
26
&
70
69
69
74
73
74
120
131. When passing a motorcycle you must:
1. Give the motorcyclist the right hand part of his traffic lane.
2. Give the motorcyclist his entire traffic lane as if his vehicle
were a car.
3. Pull to the left just far enough to miss the motorcyclist.
4. Not let the motorcyclist know you are going to pass.
132. Heavy vehicles have been entering the roadway from a muddy
area. You as a driver should:
1. Slow down as you approach the area.
2. Allow at least twice the following distance behind other vehi-
cles.
3. Know that rain will make the area extremely slippery.
4. All of the above.
133. Hydroplaning occurs when the vehicle’s tires “ride up” on water in
the roadway during heavy rains. To prevent hydroplaning you should:
1. Insure that the tires on the vehicle have good tread depth.
2. Insure that the tires on the vehicle are inflated to the proper
pressure.
3. Reduce vehicle speed when driving in the rain.
4. All of the above are correct.
134. You are driving at night and another vehicle is approaching. Your
head lamps:
1. Should be on high beam. 
2. Should be on low beam.
3. Should be off, use your parking lights.
4. May be on either high or low beam.
135. You are driving on the entry on-ramp of a freeway. You should:
1. Drive to the end of the entry on-ramp, stop, check for on-
coming traffic, signal and enter the near lane.
2. Stop, check for vehicles in the near lane, speed up on the
entry ramp, signal and enter the near lane.
3. Check for vehicles in the near lane, adjust speed for
approaching vehicles, signal and enter the near lane.
4. Always stop before entering the freeway.
136. You wish to exit the freeway at this exit. The exit speed shown
on the sign is the speed at which you should:
1. Slow to before leaving the freeway.
2. Slow to while on the freeway exit ramp.
3. Never go slower than this speed on the exit ramp.
4. Never go faster than this speed anywhere on the exit ramp.
Ref. Pg.
75
75
75
77
78
80
121
137. You wish to exit the freeway but have missed your exit ramp.
You should:
1. Back up on the shoulder to get into your exit ramp.
2. Turn around on the shoulder and drive on the shoulder to
your exit.
3. Cut across the grass to your exit.
4. Continue driving to the next exit.
138. You are driving and have a blow out. You should:
1. Slam on your brakes.
2. Hold your steering wheel tight, and steer to stop on the shoulder.
3. Keep going.
4. Turn on your emergency flashers.
139. While driving your wheels slip off the road edge. You should:
1. Jerk the steering wheel to force the vehicle back onto the
pavement.
2. Speed up and steer back onto the pavement gradually.
3. Slam on your brakes and stop.
4. Slow down using the brakes gently, when at a safe speed,
turn the steering wheel to return to the pavement.
140. You are driving on a busy street and your vehicle’s accelerator
sticks open. You should:
1. Blow your horn.
2. Slam on your brakes.
3. Turn on your hazard warning lamps.
4. Turn off your ignition, taking care not to engage the steering
wheel locking mechanism.
141. You are driving and suddenly your power steering is gone. You
should:
1. Honk the horn and turn off the ignition.
2. Turn on your hazard warning lights and brace yourself.
3. Work hard to steer, reduce speed, drive to a safe area and stop.
4. Slam on your brakes.
142. When you are driving you should give heavy trucks and buses
extra room because:
1. Trucks can stop in a shorter distance than cars.
2. Trucks require more room to maneuver than cars.
3. Trucks require a greater distance to stop than cars.
4. Both 2 and 3 above.
Ref. Pg.
80
81
82
82
&
83
83
85
&
86
122
143. You wish to drive a heavy truck in Hawaii. You must:
1. Be at least 21 years old.
2. Have a valid driver’s license for the category of vehicle you
wish to drive.
3. Have no special qualifications.
4. Drive the truck only on truck routes.
144. When you drive a heavy truck or bus on the highway you:
1. Have the added responsibility to give the proper considera-
tion to other highway users.
2. Are larger and can use that extra size to your advantage in
traffic.
3. Can expect smaller vehicles to stay out of your way.
4. Are responsible only for your truck and its cargo.
145. When driving directly behind a heavy truck or bus extra caution
must be taken because:
1. The heavy truck or bus driver may not be able to see you.
2. Your forward visibility is blocked by the truck or bus.
3. Both 1 and 2 above.
4. None of the above.
146. When changing lanes or at intersections near heavy trucks other
drivers and highway users must make allowances for:
1. The increased stopping distance required by large vehicles.
2. The decreased stopping distance required by large vehicles.
3. The increased noise made by larger vehicles.
4. The increased speed of larger vehicles.
147. You are driving up a hill and are approaching a heavy truck from
the rear. You should know:
1. That the truck may be travelling at a speed slower than the
posted speed limit.
2. That you may not be able to safely pass the truck.
3. That you may not be able to legally pass the truck.
4. All of the above are correct.
148. You are driving down a hill and notice a heavy vehicle approach-
ing from behind. You should:
1. Pay no attention as heavy vehicles always speed down hills.
2. Know that you have the right of way and it is the truck dri-
ver’s responsibility to miss you.
3. Know that you may have to move out of the heavy vehicle’s way.
4. Drive on the right side of the highway and slow down.
149. When passing a large vehicle a driver of a small vehicle must be
prepared for:
1. A loud noise.
2. Excess air pollution.
3. Wind gusts produced by the large vehicle.
4. Falling vehicle parts.
Ref. Pg.
85
85
85
86
86
86
86
123
150. When towing a trailer large enough to obstruct your inside rear-
view mirror, you are required to:
1. Have an outside rear-view mirror installed on the driver’s
side of your vehicle.
2. Have an outside rear-view mirror installed on the side of your
vehicle opposite of the driver.
3. Have outside rear-view mirrors installed on both sides of
your vehicle.
4. Have a person in the vehicle to clear you for right turns.
151. When towing a loaded trailer the weight of which is more than
one-half of the towing vehicle’s weight, or is 3,000 pounds or
more, the trailer must be equipped with:
1. Brakes.
2. Breakaway protection.
3. Hub caps.
4. Brakes and breakaway protection.
152. When towing a trailer or a house trailer, you should always:
1. Have someone ride in the trailer to keep the load steady.
2. Allow only adults to ride in the trailer.
3. Never allow anyone to ride in the trailer.
4. Allow persons to ride in house trailers only.
153. When towing a trailer you must make sure that:
1. The trailer has a safety chain which is securely attached to
the trailer hitch.
2. The trailer has a safety chain which is securely attached to
the vehicle’s bumper.
3. The trailer has a safety chain which is securely attached to
the frame of the towing vehicle.
4. The trailer hitch is equipped with a fail-safe latch.
154. When towing a trailer load it is important to insure that the trail-
er’s load is properly balanced. About             to            percent
of the total trailer weight should be on the vehicle’s trailer hitch.
1. 5 to 10.
3. 15 to 20.
2. 10 to 15. 
4.
to 25.
155. When towing a trailer you must insure that it is equipped with:
1. Wheels properly mounted and lubricated, and covered with
fenders or mud guards.
2. Good tires properly inflated.
3. Tail, stop, turn signal, license plate and if required, side
marker lamps and reflectors.
4. All of the above.
156. You are involved in an accident. You should:
1. Stop immediately.
2. Help the injured.
3. Call the police.
4. All of the above.
Ref. Pg.
87
87
87
87
88
88
52
124
157. You are involved in an accident and your vehicle is blocking
traffic. You should:
1. If possible move your vehicle off of the travelled portion of
the roadway.
2. Not move your vehicle under any circumstances.
3. Wait until the police arrive before you move your vehicle.
4. None of the above.
158. You are involved in an accident and another person is injured.
You should:
1. Moved the injured away from the scene immediately.
2. Always leave the injured where they are.
3. Do not move the injured unnecessarily, keep the injured
warm and administer first aid.
4. Stay away from the injured.
159. When you are involved in an accident where the accident scene
is not readily visible to on-coming traffic, you should:
1. Have someone warn approaching traffic.
2. Let on-coming traffic watch out for themselves.
3. Let the police handle everything.
4. Get off the roadway.
160. You inadvertently drive your vehicle into the side of an unat-
tended parked vehicle and you cannot locate the vehicle’s owner.
You as a driver:
1. Have done as much as you can.
2. Must stay until the police arrive.
3. Must leave a written notice containing your name and
address and circumstances of the accident.
4. May go on your way.
161. The pedestrian in the picture starts to cross in front of your vehi-
cle. You should:
1. Honk your horn.
2. Slow down.
3. Speed up and pass in front of the pedestrian.
4. Stop and let the pedestrian cross.
Ref. Pg.
52
52
52
52
95
125
162. You are driving on a multi-lane street. You notice a vehicle
stopped in front of a crosswalk as depicted in the picture. You
should:
1. Pass the vehicle on the right.
2. Pass the vehicle on the left.
3. Not pass the vehicle.
4. Blow your horn before passing.
163. As a pedestrian you should know that:
1. When you are in a crosswalk you should always insist on the
right of way over a vehicle.
2. You must never enter the street or crosswalk when there are
vehicles approaching close by.
3. You can enter a crosswalk at any time and it is the vehicle
driver’s responsibility to stop.
4. You have to use crosswalks only when they are convenient.
164. As a pedestrian you should know that:
1. You should look for turning vehicles before crossing the street.
2. You should never run alongside of or across the street.
3. You should walk on the left side of the street facing traffic.
4. All of the above.
165. As a driver you should give a bicyclist:
1. The same rights and privileges as motorists.
2. Twice as much room as you think he needs.
3. The right of way when you are crossing bike lanes.
4. All of the above.
166. Bicyclists are required to:
1. Obey traffic signs, signals and other traffic laws except those
which by their nature cannot apply.
2. Ride on the sidewalk in business districts.
3. Ride in the center of traffic lanes.
4. All of the above.
167. Bicyclists:
1. May ride side by side on roadways.
2. May ride two abreast on bike paths except where signs indi-
cate otherwise.
3. Have the right of way over pedestrians.
4. May ride attached to a vehicle.
Ref. Pg.
95
96
96
97
97
97
126
168. Bicyclists must refrain from:
1. Carrying passengers unless the bicycle is equipped to do so.
2. Riding on the sidewalk at any place.
3. Riding at night.
4. Riding in the roadway in a business district.
169. The driver in the vehicle in the picture is hand signaling that he
is going to:
1. Stop.
2. Turn left.
3. Turn right.
4. Slow down.
170. The truck in the picture has a solid white line in his lane of trav-
el. The truck:
1. May cross the line at any time.
2. May cross the line to enter freeway.
3. Should not cross the line.
4. Is on the wrong side of the line.
171. You are approaching a 4-way stop sign:
1. You must stop and yield to all traffic within the intersection.
2. You may drive through the stop sign if there is no other cross-
ing traffic.
3. You do not have to stop if turning right.
4. Both 2 and 3 are correct.
Ref. Pg.
98
27
34
44
12
Hawaii law prohibits leaving a child unattended in a motor vehicle:
1. By you or any adult passenger of the motor vehicle.
2. For five minutes or longer.
3. If the child is under the age of nine.
4. All of the above.
As a driver, you should know that the safest precaution regarding the
use of a phone or other hand-held electronic mobile devices and driving is:
1. Use hand-free devices so you can keep both hands on the
		
unless you are under the age of eighteen.
2. Keep your cell phone or IPOD within easy reach so it is easy
3. Check the number before answering.
4. None of the above.
When you see a pedestrian with a white cane or a guide dog
on the roadway as a driver you should know:
1. The use of a white cane identifies the pedestrian as a
2. The use of a guide dog identifies the pedestrian as a pedestrian
3. You must stop for all pedestrians, including those pedestrians
4. All of the above are correct.
Safety belts are life belts.  They:
1. Must be worn at all times when driving or riding in a vehicle.
2. Should be worn only when driving at high speeds.
3. Should be worn loosely.
4. Need to be worn only if riding in the front seat of the vehicle.
7
for you to retrieve it.
pedestrian who is blind or visually impaired.
who is blind, visually impaired or has other special needs.
who are blind or visually impaired.
Ref. Pg.
64
58
172.
173.
174.
175.
95
61
Who may park in an accessible parking space?
1. Any vehicle transporting a disabled person.
2. Any vehicle that displays a disabled parking placard.
3. Any vehicle that displays a disabled parking placard that was
issued to the disabled person being transported in the vehicle.
4. Any vehicle if there is no regular parking space available.
176.
29
What is the purpose of the access aisle next to an accessible parking space?
1. To allow for parking for emergency vehicles.
2. To allow for the deployment of a wheelchair lift/ramp and other mobility
devices from a vehicle parked in the accessible parking space.
3. To allow parking space for motorcycles, mopeds and bicycles.
4. To allow vehicles to park temporarily while waiting for a passenger.
177.
27
NOTES
128
NOTES
129
NOTES
130
VEHICLE REGISTRATION OFFICES
City & County of Honolulu
Satellite City hall offices (http://www.stallitecityhall.com/)
Hours of operation:Monday-Friday except holidays 7:45 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Ala Moana Shopping Center, 1450 Ala Moana Boulevard #1286, Call 808-768-4300 
Fort Street Mall, 1000 Fort Street Mall, Call 808-768-4103
Hawaii Kai, 6600 Kalanianaole Highway #101, Call 808-768-4800
Kapahulu Station, 1112 Kapahulu Avenue
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. & 12:00 
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Last car at 3:30 p.m. ; Call 808-768-2524
Kapalama Hale Stellite City Hall, 925 Dillingham Blvd, #101, Call 808-768-4500 
Kapolei, 1000 Uluohia Street, Call 808-768-3400
Pearlridge Shopping Center, 98-1005 Moanalua Road (9:00 am - 5:00pm), Call 
808-768-5000
Wahiawa, 330 N. Cane Street, Call 808-768-4700
Waianae, 85-670 Farrington Highway, Call 808-768-4900
Windward City Shopping Center, 45-480 Kaneohe Bay Drive C06, Call 
808-768-4100
County of Hawaii
Visit web site: http://www.hawaiicounty.gov/finance-vrl-general-info 
Hours of Operation: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday-Friday except holidays; Call 
808-961-8351
Hilo, 101 Pauahi Street, Suite #5
County of Maui
Visit Web Site: https://www.mauicounty.gov/1328/Motor-vehicle-Licensing
Hours of operation:Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Call 
808-270-7363
Kahului Service Center, Maui Mall, 70 E. Kaahumanu Avenue, Suite A17 
Lahaina, Lahaina Gateway, 335 Keawe Street, Suite 209
Pukalani, Hannibal Tavares Community Center, 91 Pukalani Street
Kihei, Kihei Community Center, 303 East Lipoa Street
Hana Office, County Public Works Office, Hana Hwy & Uakea Road
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 10:45 a.m. & 12:00 
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Call 808-248-7280
Molokai Office, Mitchell Pauole Center, 100 Ailoa Street
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Call 808-553-3430
Lanai Office, 309 Seventh Street #101
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. & 1:00 
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Call 808-565-7878
County of Kauai
Visit web site: https://www.kauai.gov/MVR
Lihue Civic Center, Kapule Building, 4444 Rice Street, Suite 466, Hours 
of Operation: 7:45 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Monday-Friday except holidays, Call 
241-6577
RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLE INSPECTION STATIONS
City and County of Honolulu Kapahlu Station: 1112 Kapahlu Avenue
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday except holidays 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. & 12:00 
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. The last inspection starts at 3:30 p.m. Call 808-768-2542
Hawaii Drivers’ Manual is printed and published by Hagadone Printing Company
in conjuction with the State Department of Transportation.
