MINNESOTA 
DRIVER’S 
MANUAL
May 2025
drive.mn.gov


Table of contents
New laws and information...............................................................................................1
Chapter 1: Your license to drive.......................................................................................8
Chapter 2: Your vehicle..................................................................................................22
Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation...............................................................26
Chapter 4: Sharing the road...........................................................................................41
Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings........................................................55
Chapter 6: Driving conditions........................................................................................71
Chapter 7: Your driving privileges..................................................................................86
Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs..........................................89
Information directory and index....................................................................................95
About this manual:
This manual concerns Minnesota laws and requirements. For complete standards, consult  
Minnesota state statutes and rules. This document is not a proper legal authority to cite in court.
This Minnesota Driver’s Manual is printed with permission of the Minnesota Department of  
Public Safety.
This information can be made available in alternative formats to individuals with disabilities.  
For assistance, call: 651-297-3298 or (TTY) 651-282-6555.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New laws and information 
Electric-assist bicycles 
Electric-assist bicycles are not mopeds, so you can ride them on most bike trails. However, you need 
to be at least 15 years old to ride one. 
Child passive restraint 
Children under 13 years old must now ride in the back seat if it is available. There are new rules about 
car seats and booster seats in Chapter 3. 
Vulnerable road users 
Many people share the road. Many are in cars and trucks, but some are on bicycles, others are walking,  
and you may see people on scooters, in wheelchairs or getting around in other ways. These road  
users don’t have seat belts or airbags, so you need to stay alert and be careful when sharing the road  
with them. 
Driver’s license and identification card fee increases 
The Minnesota Legislature increased all fees for driver’s licenses, state ID cards, commercial learner’s 
permits, as well as any duplicate cards by $6. Lawmakers also added a 75-cent surcharge to all driver’s 
license fees. The change, which took place July 1, 2023, means the total increase for driver’s license fees 
is $6.75. 
Minnesota also increased the filing fees for applications. Starting Oct. 1, 2023, the filing fee for new driver’s 
license, state ID card and commercial learner’s permit applications is $16. For renewal applications, the 
filing fee is $11. You can find current fees on the Minnesota Department of Public Safety’s Driver and 
Vehicle Services (DVS) division website drive.mn.gov. 
Driver’s License for All 
When the Minnesota Legislature passed the Driver’s License for All law, it changed the documents you  
need to get your standard driver’s license, learner’s permit or state ID. Starting Oct. 1, 2023, you can get  
your card, no matter your immigration status. The law removes the need to show proof of legal presence  
in the U.S. 
REAL ID proof of residence changes 
As of Aug. 1, 2023, you now have more options when it comes to proving your residence and getting 
your REAL ID-compliant card. You can now use internet and cable bills as utility bills. You can also use 
assisted living or nursing home statements as proof of residence. The address on your proof of residence 
document must match the address on your application. Please visit drive.mn.gov for the updated list of 
proof documents. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
1 

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
2 
 
 
 
Caretaker information included on driver’s license or identification  
card record 
You can now use your DVS records to let law enforcement know if you’re the caretaker for someone 
else. That way, if you are involved in a crash, law enforcement officers will know that there is someone 
at home who depends on you. They can quickly respond and ensure that the people you care for are not 
left alone. The new law gives you reassurance that your loved ones will be taken care of if something 
happens, reducing your anxiety and stress about leaving them alone. 
Fee and tax exemptions for veterans with total service-connected 
disability 
Veterans with a 100 percent total-service connected disability are now exempt from sales, registration 
and wheelage taxes for up to two vehicles. They are also exempt from title fees and fees for driver’s 
licenses and identification cards, including filing fees. 
Expansion of eligibility for veteran designation on card 
This new law expands the types of veterans eligible to get the veteran indicator on their driver’s license 
or identification card. More Minnesota veterans can now display the veteran indicator. If you are a  
retired or honorably discharged member of the National Guard or a reserve component of the U.S. 
Armed Forces, you now qualify. You can prove that you are qualified using a military retiree ID card,  
veteran ID card, veteran health ID card or your DD-214 form that shows honorable or honorable  
conditions with 181 days of consecutive service. 
Elimination of written test requirement for new Minnesota residents 
If you are 21 and older and have a valid, unexpired license from another U.S. state, you will no longer 
need to take the written test when applying for a Minnesota driver’s license. You also will not need 
to take the written test when applying for a motorcycle endorsement if you have a valid motorcycle 
endorsement from another U.S. state. 
Option to provide race and ethnicity data with applications 
You now have the option to share your race and ethnicity data in your applications for new and renewed 
driver’s licenses and identification cards. Providing this data is voluntary — you are not required to share 
information — and the data is classified as private. The data will be shared with the Department of Public 
Safety Office of Traffic Safety (OTS) to study traffic citations, drivers’ education and other related areas. 
Expansion of driver’s license for medical reason 
If you are 15 years old, you may be able to get a driver’s license for your own medical needs or the  
medical needs of your relatives. You will need to meet specific requirements and provide the necessary 
documents. More information about exemptions to the minimum age requirement can be found in  
Chapter 1. 

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
3 
 
 
 
 
Expansion of restricted license for farm work 
If you are under age 16 and work on a farm, you may be eligible for the restricted farm license, even if 
your parent or guardian does not own the farm. All other restrictions for the farm license remain the 
same. More information about exemptions to the minimum age requirement can be found in Chapter 1. 
Remote application option for incarcerated individuals 
If you are serving a sentence longer than six months in a jail or correctional facility without an existing 
agreement with Driver and Vehicle Services (DVS), you can now renew your driver’s licenses and  
identification cards remotely. 
Reintegration license 
If you are getting released from prison in Minnesota, you may be qualified to get a valid temporary 
driver’s license without paying outstanding fines or reinstatement fees. You must meet eligibility  
requirements. The license expires 15 months after it is issued and is canceled if you break traffic laws  
and lose driving privileges. 
Driver’s manual and study materials 
DVS has created study materials for the written and road tests. These materials will help you prepare 
for the required driving tests. You can find them by visiting drive.mn.gov. 
Changes to voter registration for driver’s license and identification 
card applications 
Under a new law, if you provide proof that you are a U.S. citizen (like a U.S. passport, U.S. birth certificate 
or certificate of citizenship) when applying for or renewing a driver’s license or identification card, you 
will be automatically registered to vote. Your information will be sent to the Office of the Secretary of 
State for voter registration. 
If you previously applied for a driver’s license or ID card in Minnesota, DVS might not have a record of 
your citizenship documents. You can provide documentation showing your citizenship to start the voter 
registration process under the new system. DVS will not send your data to the Office of the Secretary  
of State if you provided these documents before Oct. 1, 2023. 
If you do not wish to be registered to vote after providing DVS with citizenship documents, you must 
opt out with the Office of the Secretary of State. More information about voting can be found at: 
sos.mn.gov/elections-voting/register-to-vote 

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Department of Public Safety’s
Driver and Vehicle Services (DVS) division
is committed to creating a safe environment 
for our customers and staf. 
It is a crime to interfere with the work of a DVS employee. Minnesota Statute 609.50, Subdivision 5. 
THE FOLLOWING BEHAVIORS 
WILL NOT BE TOLERATED: 
1. Unruly or disruptive behavior, including verbal harassment
of staff or customers 
2. Obscene or abusive language, gestures or actions 
3. Interfering with services being delivered 
4. Failure to follow instructions of the staff 
5. Violent behavior, including conduct that endangers employees
or customers, or damages state property 
You will be asked to leave the premises and law enforcement 
will be contacted if any of these behaviors occur. 
Crime to obstruct the work of a DVS employee 
It is a crime to obstruct the work of a DVS employee. Refer to Minnesota Statute 609.50, Subdivision 5. 
Completing the pre-application makes office visits quicker 
Using the pre-application feature in DVS online services allows you to complete a large part of your  
application online, reducing your time at the counter. DVS online services, available on mobile devices, 
provides a list of required documents for each license type. This helps you ensure you have all  
necessary documents ready when you visit a driver’s license office. 
Remember to bring your confirmation page and the documents listed on the confirmation page. Start 
your application online using the pre-application feature no more than 30 days before visiting a driver’s 
license office to avoid completing a paper application. 

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
5Commissioner Bob Jacobson signaturephoto of Department of Public Safety Commissioner Bob Jac
A message from the Commissioner of Public Safety
Dear fellow Minnesotan,
Whether you’re an experienced driver who has been behind the wheel for decades  
or a teenager just getting to know the rules of the road for the first time, the  
Minnesota Department of Public Safety’s Driver and Vehicle Services (DVS) division 
is committed to ensuring that everyone with a driver’s license knows the laws and 
practices that lead to safe driving.
There are more than 4.5 million licensed drivers in Minnesota and that number will 
only grow as we implement the Driver’s License for All law passed by the Minnesota 
Legislature. Our goal is for all of those drivers — as well as the pedestrians and  
cyclists they share the road with — to navigate our state’s roads safely and get  
home to their loved ones.
This manual lays out how we can all do our part to achieve that goal, as well as the process for becoming  
a licensed driver in Minnesota. DVS has taken great strides to make sure our vitally important services  
are accessible to Minnesotans of all backgrounds. Visit 
 
assistant in English, Spanish, Somali and Hmong, and to set up your MyDVS account to track your license  
and registration information online.
drive.mn.gov to access our multilingual virtual 
Remember that driving is a privilege that comes with a responsibility to the others on the road. Please 
buckle up, obey the speed laws and never drive under the influence of alcohol. Respect for traffic laws  
and respect for other drivers is what keeps us all safe on the road.
Sincerely,
Bob Jacobson 
Commissioner of Public Safety

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written test checklist 
Do you have everything you need for your written test? Use this checklist to prepare for 
your visit: 
❏ I have made a Class D written test appointment. 
❏ I have completed the online pre-application at dps.mn.gov/mydvs no more than 30 days before 
my appointment. 
❏ I have the required identification (see page 9). 
❏ I know my Social Security number if I am eligible for one. 
❏ I have money to pay the fees. 
If under 18 years of age: 
❏ I am at least 15 years old. 
❏ I have my certificate of enrollment (“Blue Card”) proving that I completed classroom instruction and 
am signed up for behind-the-wheel instruction; or I have my certificate of enrollment (“Pink Card”) 
proving that I am enrolled in a concurrent driver education course and have completed the first 
15 classroom hours. 
❏ If completed, I have the Supplemental Parental Curriculum completion certificate. 
❏ My parent, court-appointed guardian, county-appointed foster parent or the director of the 
transitional living program I am residing in will sign and approve my application. If someone other 
than my parent will sign, I have the appropriate documentation. 
Road test checklist 
Do you have everything you need for your road test? Use this checklist to prepare for your visit: 
❏ I have made a road test appointment. 
❏ I have completed the online pre-application at dps.mn.gov/mydvs no more than 30 days before 
my appointment. 
❏ I have a licensed driver who will accompany me to my road test. I understand that if I do not have 
a licensed driver with me, my road test may be cancelled. 
❏ I have my valid instruction permit to give to the examiner. 
❏ I will provide a vehicle in safe working condition for the test: 
– Doors must open from the inside and outside. 
– Seat belts must work properly. 
– Headlights, taillights, brake lights and turn signals must work. 
– Vehicle registration must be current or have a 60-day permit. 

New laws and information
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
❏ I have current proof of insurance for the vehicle I will use for the test. Acceptable proof includes 
original insurance card issued by the company, policy declaration page or e-insurance from the 
insurance company website or on an electronic device. 
❏ I have money to pay the fees. 
If under 18 years of age: 
❏ I am at least 16 years old. 
❏ I have my certificate of course completion (“White Card”) proving that I completed driver education. 
❏ I have held an instruction permit for the last six months without a conviction for a moving violation 
or an alcohol or controlled substance violation. 
❏ If all or part of my six months of driving experience was in another state, I have a certified driving 
record from that state to verify I qualify for the provisional license. 
❏ I have my Supervised Driving Log completed and signed by a parent or guardian. 
❏ If completed, I have the Supplemental Parental Curriculum completion certificate. 
❏ My parent, court-appointed guardian, county-appointed foster parent or the director of the 
transitional living program I am residing in will sign and approve my application. If someone other 
than my parent will sign, I have the appropriate documentation. 
If 18 years of age: 
❏ I have had my instruction permit for at least six months. 
If 19 years of age or older: 
❏ I have had my instruction permit for at least three months. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1: Your license to drive 
This chapter provides information about how to obtain a Minnesota driver’s license. 
Getting your license to drive 
To drive on public streets or highways in Minnesota, you need a valid, unexpired driver’s license. If you 
have never had a driver’s license in any state or country, you must pass a written test and a vision test, 
apply for an instruction permit and pass a road test. If your Minnesota driver’s license has been expired 
for more than one year but less than five years, you must pass a written test and a vision test before 
applying for a new license. 
If you are 21 years of age or older and moving to Minnesota from another state, certain U.S. territories or 
Canada, you can get a license by passing a vision test and completing an application. You are not required 
to take a written test or road test if you present a valid, unexpired driver’s license. If your former state 
license is expired less than one year, you are required to pass the written test. If your former license is 
expired more than one year, you need to pass the written and road tests. 
You have 60 days (30 days for commercial drivers) once you become a Minnesota resident to get your 
Minnesota license or permit. If you have a motorcycle endorsement on your valid, unexpired out-of-state 
license, you can get a Minnesota endorsement by paying the fees. If your license is expired and you want 
a motorcycle endorsement, you must pass a written test, a road test and pay the fees. 
If you are moving to Minnesota from a country other than the U.S. or Canada, you must pass a written 
test, a vision test and a road test even if you have a valid license from your former country. 
You will not be able to get your Minnesota driver’s license until you present all other driver’s licenses 
and identification cards to DVS. 
Who does not need a Minnesota license? 
You can drive on public roads in Minnesota without a valid Minnesota driver’s license or permit if you 
meet one of these exceptions: 
■ You are a nonresident who is at least 15 years old and has a valid driver’s license from your home 
state or country. 
■ You have become a resident of Minnesota and have a valid driver’s license from another state, a 
Canadian province or U.S. military authority. You have up to 60 days after becoming a resident to 
get your Minnesota license. 
■ You have a valid commercial driver’s license from another state. You have up to 30 days after becoming 
a Minnesota resident to get your commercial Minnesota license. 
■ You are employed by or in service to the U.S. government and are driving a commercial motor vehicle 
for military purposes. 
■ You are not a Minnesota resident, are at least 18 years old, your home country does not require drivers 
to be licensed and the vehicle you drive is registered for the current year in your home country. You can 
drive this vehicle in Minnesota for up to 90 days in any calendar year without a valid license or permit. 
■ You temporarily drive a farm tractor or other farm implement on a public road. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
8 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■ You are operating a snowmobile. For snowmobile laws, visit the Department of Natural Resources 
website at dnr.state.mn.us. 
■ You are a railroad operator driving a locomotive, train or on-track equipment on rails, including when 
crossing a street or highway. 
Who cannot be licensed? 
You will not be issued a Minnesota driver’s license or instruction permit if: 
■ You fail to present proper identification. 
■ You fail to complete or pass any part of the required driver’s license tests. 
■ You cannot read and understand official road signs or state traffic laws. 
■ You are under 15 years of age. 
■ You are under 18 years of age, do not have a valid license from another state and cannot present 
a certificate proving that you completed an approved driver education course. 
■ You are 18 years old or younger and have had an instruction permit for less than six months. 
■ You are 19 years old or older and have had an instruction permit for less than three months. 
■ Your license is suspended, and you have not met all reinstatement requirements. 
■ Your license is revoked, and you have not met all reinstatement requirements. 
■ Your license is canceled. 
■ A court has ruled you mentally incompetent and the Department of Public Safety has determined 
that you cannot drive safely. 
■ The Commissioner of Public Safety has determined you cannot drive safely due to a physical or 
mental disability. 
■ The Commissioner of Public Safety has good cause to believe that allowing you to drive would be 
detrimental to public safety. 
Bring identification 
To take the written and road tests, you must present proper identification that verifies your first, middle 
and last name, and your date of birth. If the names on your identification documents do not match, 
you must also provide proof of your legal name changes, such as your certified marriage certificates, 
certified divorce decrees or other certified court orders that specify the name change. 
You must also present proper identification when you apply for an instruction permit, driver’s license 
or state identification card. 
If your documents are not in English, you must provide a qualified English translation (see page 11). 
DVS will verify your documents and may not accept them if they are laminated or altered. We cannot 
accept photocopies of identification documents, and we may confiscate fraudulent documents. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
10
What you need to bring when applying for a license or ID:
Standard driver’s license or ID
 
■You may present a Minnesota driver’s license, identification card or permit that is current or expired  
for five years or less if it has a photo, or one year or less if it does not have a photo.
 
■If you do not have one of these items, you must present two documents. One document must contain  
your full name and your date of birth. These documents are referred to as primary and secondary  
documents and may include a birth certificate, passport or Social Security card.
 If the name on your driver’s license, identification card or permit has changed, or if the names on  
your other documents do not match, you must also present proof of your legal name change(s). 
■
For standard driver’s license or ID requirements, visit dps.mn.gov/divisions/dvs/license-and-id/
class-d-regular-dl/class-d-dl-forms-documents-and-manuals.
REAL ID
Applying for a REAL ID compliant card requires more documentation than a standard Minnesota driver’s 
license. You must provide the following in person when applying:
 
■One document proving identity, date of birth and legal presence in the United States.
– If the name on your identity document is not the same as your current name, you must submit  
a name change document.
 
■You must know your Social Security number.
 
■Two documents proving your current residency in Minnesota. For REAL ID requirements, visit 
dps.mn.gov/divisions/dvs/license-and-id/dl-and-id-card-information/real-id-dl-and-id-card.
Enhaced driver’s license or ID
Applying for an enhanced driver’s license or identification card requires additional requirements and  
documentation compared to a standard Minnesota license.
 Only applicants who can provide proof of identity, full legal name,Social Security number, photographic  
identity, Minnesota residency and U.S. citizenship are eligible for a Minnesota enhanced driver’s license  
or ID.
■
 
■Two types of documents must be submitted to prove Minnesota residency, such as an electric bill or 		
phone bill, and a tax return.
 
■An enhanced driver’s license or ID must list your Minnesota residence address.
 
■You must complete an interview questionnaire at the time of application.
 
■A $15 fee is required in addition to the fee for a driver’s license or ID card. For enhanced driver’s 
license or ID requirements, visit 

dps.mn.gov/divisions/dvs/license-and-id/dl-and-id-card-information/
enhanced-dl-and-id-card.
Verification of name change
If you legally change your name through marriage, divorce or a court order, you must show proof of the 
change. You must present a certified marriage certificate, a certified court order specifying the name 
change or a certified divorce decree specifying the name change. If you have had multiple name changes, 
you must provide documentation for all of those changes.

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translation of documents 
If your documents are not in English, you must provide a qualified English translation. The Certificate 
of Translation form is available at drive.mn.gov, at DVS exam stations and at driver’s license offices. 
The translator must certify the following: 
■ The document is accompanied by a full English translation. 
■ The translation of the document is true and accurate, meaning all words on the presented document 
have been correctly translated. 
■ The translator is not related by blood or marriage to the subject of the document. 
■ The translator is competent to translate from the original language into English. 
■ The translator understands that if any part of the translation is intentionally false, they will be subject 
to penalty. 
Social Security number 
Applicants for DVS cards must provide their Social Security number on the application form. Your Social 
Security number is private and will be secure in the driver’s license information system, accessible only 
to those lawfully authorized. If you have not been issued a Social Securiy number, you must check the 
appropriate box on the application form. 
Social Security numbers are not printed on or embedded in driver’s licenses or identification cards.  
Under federal law (42 U.S.C. § 405(c) (2)(C)(i)), the state is authorized to require Social Security numbers 
for driver’s license programs. If you do not provide a Social Security number when eligible, Minnesota 
cannot process your application for a driver’s license or identification card. 
The written test 
You can take the written test at DVS exam stations across the state. Appointments are required for the 
Class D written test. To schedule an appointment, visit dps.mn.gov/mydvs. The written test includes 
multiple choice and true-or-false questions that assess your knowledge of Minnesota traffic laws and 
road signs. The test may betaken on paper or on a computer. 
At exam stations offering the test on a computer, you can take it in English, several other languages 
or in American Sign Language (ASL). Headphones are available to hear the questions as you read them. 
If you need special accommodations, please inquire at the exam station. You may take only one written 
test per day and must score 80 percent to pass. 
You must show proper identification before taking the test. If you are under 18, you must also present a 
certificate of enrollment (“Blue Card” or “Pink Card”) from an approved driver education course, showing 
that you have completed the required classroom instruction and enrolled in behind-the-wheel training. 
Classroom instruction is not required if you are 18 or older. Information on home-schooling rules and 
regulations is available at drive.mn.gov. 
If you fail two consecutive written tests, a $10 fee is charged for the third and any subsequent tests. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The vision screening 
Your eyes will be screened when you apply for or renew your driver’s license or instruction permit. This 
is not a medical exam; it checks if your vision meets the minimum standards. Your normal or corrected 
vision must be at least 20/40, and your peripheral vision must be at least 105 degrees. 
If your peripheral vision is less than 105 degrees or you fail the vision screening, you will be asked to see 
an eye doctor and return the doctor’s report to the DVS Driver Evaluation Unit. The report will determine 
if you see well enough to drive safely or if you need vision correction or other restrictions. 
The road test 
The road test includes three parts: demonstrating your vehicle’s safety equipment, showing your vehicle 
control skills and performing a driving test. You will be tested on road rules and your ability to drive safely 
under normal traffic conditions. The examiner will assess your risk awareness and reactions. Your ability  
to observe intersections, change lanes and handle other situations will be evaluated. You will not be asked 
to do anything illegal during the test. 
When you have the necessary driving skills and meet all the requirements, you can take the road test. 
You must make an appointment online at dps.mn.gov/mydvs or call 651-284-1234. 
To take the road test, you must present your valid instruction permit and current proof of insurance  
with the original insurance card or policy. If you are under 18, you must also present a supervised  
driving log and a certificate of course completion (“White Card”) proving you completed an approved 
driver education course and behind-the-wheel instruction. You must provide your own vehicle for the  
test. Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs) are not allowed. If using a rental vehicle, you must be listed  
as a driver on the rental agreement. You may use a vehicle with a backup camera, but the camera should 
not be the only method of observation when backing up. 
The vehicle must meet these requirements: 
■ Doors open from both inside and outside. 
■ Seat belts work properly. 
■ Headlights, taillights, turn signals and brake lights work. 
■ Any equipment required by your license or permit restrictions must work unless you are trying to 
remove the restrictions. 
During the test: 
■ No smoking is allowed, and the vehicle must be smoke-free before the examiner enters. 
■ No electronic devices or cell phone usage. 
■ No passengers, including pets, children or interpreters, are allowed. 
■ Loose objects that could break or cause injury must be removed. 
■ Vehicles with parking assist cannot use this feature for parallel parking during the test. 
If you fail two consecutive road tests, you will be charged a $20 fee for each subsequent test. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
13 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vehicle safety equipment demonstration 
Before starting the road test, you may be asked to perform a safety equipment check on your vehicle. Your 
vehicle must be in safe working condition and have all necessary equipment. You will need to demonstrate 
knowledge about the following: 
■ Seat adjustment. 
■ Seat belts. 
■ Emergency (parking) brake. 
■ Activating headlights, both high and low beams (vehicles with fully automatic headlights require the 
driver to manually activate the high and low beam headlights). 
■ Activating hazard warning lights (four-way flashers). 
■ Horn. 
■ Windshield wipers. 
■ Windshield defroster and fan controls. 
■ Mirrors. 
■ Fuel gauge. 
This list does not include all equipment and items required by law. 
If you are unable to pass the safety equipment demonstration, you will not be allowed to finish the road 
test that day. 
Vehicle control skills and driving performance 
During the road test, you will be examined and evaluated on your: 
■ Control of the vehicle. 
■ Ability to parallel park. 
■ Ability to park on a hill. 
■ Response to traffic and road conditions, traffic signs and signals. 
■ Ability to signal and perform right and left turns properly. 
■ Ability to use both marked and unmarked lanes of traffic. 
■ Observation and consideration of pedestrians and other drivers. 
■ Ability to perform the 90-degree backing skill maneuver, which simulates backing into a 10-foot-wide 
driveway or parking space. 
These actions will cause you to fail the road test immediately: 
■ Disobeying a traffic law. 
■ Driving dangerously, carelessly or recklessly, including any action that could result in a traffic crash. 
■ Inability to control your vehicle or complete a maneuver without assistance from the examiner. 
■ Involving your vehicle in a crash that you could have avoided, even if you are not legally at fault. 
■ Not cooperating with the examiner or refusing to follow the examiner’s instructions. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you fail the road test, you may retake it after you have had time to practice. You will be assigned 
practice time that must be completed before your next road test. If you fail the road test two times, a 
retest fee of $20 will be charged for each subsequent test. If you fail the road test four times, you must 
complete at least six hours of behind-the-wheel instruction with a licensed instructor before taking the 
test again. 
When you pass the road test, you may apply for your Minnesota driver’s license. If you are under 18, 
your parent, legal guardian, county-appointed foster parent or the director of the transitional living 
program where you live must sign and approve your application. Your temporary paper driver’s license 
is valid until the expiration date listed or until you receive your permanent driver’s license in the mail. 
Medical conditions 
When applying for an instruction permit or driver’s license, you will be asked questions about medical 
conditions. Providing false information on the application could result in you losing your driving privileges. 
If you have a medical condition, you may need to provide a statement from a physician indicating  
whether or not the condition affects your ability to drive safely. If you already have a permit or license 
and are diagnosed with epilepsy or a condition that could cause loss of consciousness, you must submit a 
physician’s statement within 30 days of the diagnosis. The statement must indicate whether or not  
the condition interferes with your ability to drive safely. 
Send medical statements to: 
Driver and Vehicle Services  
Driver Evaluation Unit 
445 Minnesota St., Suite 170  
St. Paul, MN 55101-5170 
For more information, contact the Driver Evaluation Unit at 651-296-2025. 
Parent’s approval for under age 18 
If you are under 18, your application for a driver’s license or instruction permit must be approved 
by one of the following: 
■ One of your parents 
■ A court-appointed guardian 
■ A county-appointed foster parent 
■ The director of the transitional living program where you reside 
If your parents are divorced, your custodial parent or a stepparent married to your custodial parent  
may approve your application. If you have no living parents or guardian, or if you are married or legally 
emancipated, a close family member, employer or a spouse who is at least 18 years old may sign your  
application. Approval can be withdrawn by the individual who signed the application. Forms can be  
obtained at driver’s license offices, DVS exam stations and on the DVS website. 
If you are a foreign exchange student, your host sponsors cannot sign your application unless they have 
legal guardianship of you as a minor (documentation required). You will need two application forms with 
notarized signatures from your parents: one for the instruction permit and one for the provisional license. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graduated Driver’s Licensing (GDL) system 
Minnesota has a Graduated Driver’s Licensing (GDL) system to help ease inexperienced drivers into driving. 
Under the GDL system, if you are 18 years old or younger, you must hold an instruction permit for at least 
six months before taking the road test. After passing the road test, you may apply for your license. 
Your instruction permit 
The first step to becoming a licensed driver is to get an instruction permit. Your permit is valid for two 
years of practice driving with a licensed supervising driver sitting in the front passenger seat. It is illegal 
to practice driving without a valid instruction permit. When you drive, you must have your instruction 
permit with you at all times. 
To qualify and obtain an instruction permit, you must: 
■ Be at least 15 years old. 
■ Complete 30 hours of classroom instruction and be enrolled in behind-the-wheel instruction; or be 
enrolled in a concurrent driver education course and have completed the first 15 classroom hours of 
the curriculum. If you are 18 or older, classroom and behind-the-wheel instruction is not required. 
■ Comply with identification requirements. 
■ Pass a vision screening and a written test. 
■ Complete a license application and pay the required instruction permit fee. 
If you are under 18 
You must be supervised by a driver aged 21 or older. Everyone in the vehicle must wear a seat belt or 
use a child passenger restraint system. You may not use or talk on a cell phone while driving, with or 
without a hands-free device. 
If you are 18 and older 
You must be supervised by a driver aged 18 or older. Everyone in the vehicle must wear a seat belt or 
use a child passenger restraint system. 
After the required six months of practice driving (or three months if you are 19 years old or older), you 
may take the road test. For road test scheduling information, see Chapter 9 of this manual. 
Before you can take the road test, you must present your valid instruction permit and current proof 
of insurance for the vehicle to the driver examiner. If your instruction permit is lost or expired, you can 
apply for a new permit. The new permit will be valid for two years from the day you apply. 
Your provisional license 
The provisional license is the second phase of the GDL system. This license is valid for two years from the 
application date and has restrictions that do not apply to a full driver’s license. Everyone in your vehicle 
must wear a seat belt or use a child passenger restraint system, and you may not use or talk on a cell phone 
while driving, including with a hands-free device. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To qualify for your provisional license, you must: 
■ Be at least 16 years old. 
■ Have completed the classroom and behind-the-wheel phases of driver education. 
■ Have held an instruction permit for six months with no convictions for moving or alcohol/controlled-
substance violations. 
■ Submit a supervised driving log. Parents/guardians have two options: 
– Complete a parent class provided by a Minnesota-approved driver education program and submit 
a log showing at least 40 hours of supervised driving, including 15 nighttime hours. 
– If not taking the parent class, your teen must submit a log showing at least 50 hours of supervised 
driving, including 15 nighttime hours. 
■ Have passed a road test. 
■ Have a parent, court-appointed guardian, county-appointed foster parent or director of the transitional 
living program where you reside sign and approve your license application. 
Once these requirements are met, you may apply for your provisional license and pay the appropriate fee. 
While you have a provisional license, you must follow the following restrictions: 
Nighttime limitations: 
■ During the first six months, you must not drive from midnight to 5 a.m. unless you are: 
– Accompanied by a licensed driver who is at least 25 years old. 
– Driving between home and work. 
– Driving between home and a school event for which the school does not provide transportation. 
– Driving for employment purposes. 
Passenger limitations: 
■ During the first six months, you may have only one passenger under 20 unless accompanied by a parent 
or guardian. 
■ During the second six months, you may have no more than three passengers under 20 unless 
accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
Note: You may have immediate family members under age 20 as passengers during both time periods. 
Vanessa’s Law 
If you are convicted of a crash-related moving violation or an alcohol/controlled substance-related 
violation (such as Driving While Impaired, Implied Consent, Open Bottle, or Underage Drinking and Driving/ 
Not a Drop Law) while you are driving without a license as a teenager, you cannot get a license, instruction 
permit or provisional license until you are 18. At 18, you must: 
■ Pass the Class D written test. 
■ Fulfill reinstatement requirements, including payment of fees, which can be up to $680 depending 
on circumstances. 
■ Obtain an instruction permit and hold it for at least six months. 
■ Pass the road test and apply for a new license. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you lose driving privileges due to a crash-related moving violation or an alcohol/controlled substance-
related violation while driving with your provisional license, you cannot regain a license until age 18. 
At that time, you must complete the following steps to obtain a full driver’s license: 
■ Fulfill all reinstatement requirements, including the payment of fees, which can be up to $680 
depending on circumstances. 
■ Complete the classroom portion of a formal driver education course. 
■ Pass the Class D written test if the license has been expired for over one year. 
■ Obtain an instruction permit and hold it for three months. 
■ Complete the behind-the-wheel portion of a driver education course and apply for a new license. 
Getting your under 21 Class D driver’s license 
To get your under 21 Class D driver’s license, you must be at least 18 years old or have held a provisional 
license for 12 consecutive months with no convictions for alcohol violations, controlled-substance 
violations or crash-related moving violations. You also must not have more than one conviction for a 
moving violation that is not crash-related. If you are under 18, you must certify that you have driven 
for at least 10 hours under the supervision of a licensed driver who is at least 21 years old. You must 
complete an application for a driver’s license and pay the fee. If you upgrade from a provisional license 
with no violations on your record, you will receive a $3.50 credit toward the fee. If you are under 21, 
you will receive a license marked “Under 21.” This license will expire on your 21st birthday and will 
then expire every four years on your birthday. 
Exceptions to minimum age requirement 
At age 15, you may qualify for a restricted farm work driver’s license, a special medical driver’s license, 
or a motorized bicycle (moped) permit after completing a driver education course and passing a 
road test. 
Restricted farm work driver’s license: 
■ With this license, if you work on a farm, you may drive to help with farm work, regardless of whether 
their parent or guardian owns the farm. 
■ You may drive alone to perform farm work during daylight hours within 40 miles of the farmhouse. 
■ To obtain this license, your parent or legal guardian must fill out a form and present it to the driver 
examiner at the road test, along with a property tax statement classifying the property as agricultural. 
If the land is rented, a rental agreement and property tax statement are required. 
■ If you work for a farmer who is not your parent or guardian, the farm owner must fill out a form 
stating the need for the license and provide a property tax statement. 
■ You do not need to wait six months before taking the road test, but you must apply for an instruction 
permit. When ready for the road test, you must present a certificate of completion from an approved 
behind-the-wheel driver education course and a supervised driving log. 
■ The farm work restriction can be removed after you have held the license for six months and have 
reached 16 years of age, but you will need to apply to have it removed. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special medical driver’s license: 
■ You may be issued this license at age 15 when there are no licensed drivers in the household, and 
you must drive for personal medical needs or the medical needs of a relative or disabled relative 
who cannot drive due to a disability. 
■ You must meet requirements and submit a completed License for Medical Reason Exemption form 
before a road test. 
■ The Commissioner of Public Safety may set conditions and limits to ensure public safety. 
■ You do not need to wait six months before taking the road test but must apply for an instruction 
permit. When ready for the road test, you must present a certificate of completion from an approved 
behind-the-wheel driver education course and a supervised driving log. 
■ The restriction will appear on the license as MEDLIM. 
Motorized bicycle permit: 
You can get a motorized bicycle (moped) permit at age 15 after completing a motorized bicycle safety 
course and passing the written, vision and road tests. An electric-assist bicycle is not considered a moped, 
and you do not need a test or a license to ride one. However, you must be at least 15 years old. 
Driver’s license classifications 
Your driver’s license allows you to drive a motor vehicle on public streets and highways. You must always 
carry your license with you when driving. You need the appropriate class of license and endorsements 
for the type of vehicle you are driving. Information about your license class, endorsements and any 
restrictions will be listed on the back of your driver’s license. 
There are four classes of driver’s licenses and several endorsements available to Minnesota drivers. 
Class D license 
The Class D driver’s license is the most common license for Minnesota drivers. With a Class D license, 
more commonly known as the standard driver’s license, you may drive: 
■ All single-unit vehicles (cars, pickups and small trucks) with these exceptions: 
– Those with a gross vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more. 
– Vehicles designed to carry more than 15 passengers (including the driver). 
– Vehicles that carry hazardous materials. 
■ Any farm truck transporting agricultural products, farm machinery or farm supplies (including 
hazardous materials) within 150 miles of the farm. You must be the farmer, an immediate family 
member or a farm employee to drive the farm truck. 
■ Authorized emergency vehicles, regardless of their weight. 
■ Recreational vehicles (motor homes and camping trailers) for personal use. 
■ Motorized bicycles (mopeds). 
■ Electric-assist bicycles. 
■ Motorcycles, with the appropriate license endorsement. 
■ Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs). 
■ Autocycles. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You may also tow a trailer or other vehicle if either of the following is true: 
■It has a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less
■It has a gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds, but the combined gross vehicle weight
of the vehicle and trailer is 26,000 pounds or less.
License endorsements 
You must have an endorsement on your license to drive motorcycles, buses, school buses, double and 
triple trailers, tank vehicles, or carry hazardous materials. You must pass additional written tests to 
receive all endorsements and specialized road tests to receive the bus, school bus and motorcycle 
endorsements. 
Commercial Driver’s Licenses (CDLs) 
Class A, B and C licenses are called commercial driver’s licenses (CDLs). A CDL allows you to drive all 
Class D vehicles, plus certain types of vehicles specific to each CDL class. 
Class C license 
If you have a Class C license with a hazardous materials endorsement, you can transport hazardous 
materials in a Class D vehicle. With a tanker endorsement, you can carry hazardous liquid or gaseous 
materials in a permanently mounted or portable tank. 
Class B license 
A Class B license, with necessary endorsements, allows you to drive all Class C and D vehicles and all 
other single-unit vehicles. You can tow vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less 
when operating a Class B power unit. 
Class A license 
If you have a Class A license with all the appropriate endorsements, you may drive any vehicle or trailer 
combination. 
CDL information 
For more information about CDLs and CDL requirements, see the Minnesota Commercial Driver’s Manual, 
which includes the Minnesota School Bus Driver’s Handbook. These are available at drive.mn.gov. 
Note: If you drive any class of vehicle as an employer or employee, you may need to follow commercial 
motor carrier requirements. These requirements may apply to single-unit and combination vehicles of 
more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (such as construction vehicles), vehicles used to deliver 
packages and other items, and vehicles designed or used to transport more than eight passengers, 
including the driver. To legally drive these vehicles, you may need a valid U.S. Department of Transpor-
tation medical examiner’s certificate. You may also have restrictions on driving hours and vehicle 
maintenance and inspection requirements. 
For more information, contact the Minnesota State Patrol at 651-405-6196 or the Minnesota Department 
of Transportation Office of Freight and Commercial Vehicle Operations at 651-215-6330. 
CDL for people under 21 years old 
You may obtain a CDL before you turn 21; however, the license will carry specific restrictions. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
20 
 
License renewal and replacement 
A driver’s license issued by the state of Minnesota typically expires on your birthday and must be  
renewed every four years after you reach 21 years old. If your current license is lost, damaged or  
destroyed, you must apply for a duplicate license. If you have lost your license, you must present  
proper identification when it is time to renew it. To renew your license, you must pass a vision test. 
Name or address change 
If you change your name or address before your license expires, you must apply for a duplicate license 
within 30 days. If you need a replacement instruction permit, you must renew your permit. 
Active military service 
If you are in active military service with the U.S. Armed Forces and have a valid unexpired Minnesota 
driver’s license upon entering military service, you are not required to renew your license until you are 
separated or discharged, regardless of your length of service. To ensure that your driving record will be 
maintained, you will need to submit military documents to DVS that shows your date of entry into the 
military. Documents can be submitted online or mailed to: Driver and Vehicle Services, 445 Minnesota 
St., Suite 180, St. Paul, MN 55101. If you have questions, call DVS at 651-297-3298. 
You must renew your license within one year of your separation or discharge from active military service 
by presenting your Minnesota driver’s license and your DD-214 military discharge papers. 
This exception also applies to your spouse, domestic partner or dependents under age 26 of those in 
active military service, if they do not reside in Minnesota during the active military service period. 
If moving to Minnesota with an out-of-state license that has been expired for more than a year, you may 
be able to waive the road test. If you are still in the military, you need to provide an In-Service letter from 
your commanding officer. 
Peace Corps and federal foreign service employees 
If you are serving outside Minnesota as a Peace Corps volunteer or as an employee of a federal  
department or agency assigned to foreign service, and you had a valid Minnesota driver’s license  
when you started, you do not need to renew your license until your service ends, no matter how  
long your service lasts. To keep your driving record up to date, submit documents showing your  
start date to DVS. You can submit documents online or mail them to: Driver and Vehicle Services,  
445 Minnesota St., Suite 180, St. Paul, MN 55101. 
You must renew your license within one year after your service ends by presenting your Minnesota 
driver’s license and service papers. This exception also applies to your spouse, domestic partner or  
dependents under age 26 if they do not live in Minnesota during the service period. 
Selective Service 
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident between the ages of 18 and 26, you will be registered with the U.S. 
Selective Service, more commonly known as the draft, when you apply for any Minnesota license or ID 
card. If you are under 18 years of age, DVS will withhold Selective Service registration until your 18th 
birthday. “Consent to Registration” at the time of application is in compliance with the Military Selective 
Service Act, U.S. Code, Title 50, Appendix, Section 453. 

Chapter 1: Your license to drive
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State identification cards 
You can apply for a Minnesota state ID card at any office that accepts driver’s license applications. 
You must present proper documentation for the type of card you are applying for (Standard, REAL ID 
or Enhanced). You can only hold one type of card. DVS will not issue an identification card to someone 
who already has a valid driver’s license or instruction permit without a downgrade statement stating 
the person is giving up their driving privileges. 
Driver services fees 
The Minnesota Legislature sets driver services fees. You can find a complete list of driver’s license, 
identification card and other driver services fees at dps.mn.gov/divisions/dvs/license-and-id/ 
dl-and-id-card-fees. 
Expedited (fast track) services 
You can fast track your driver’s license or state ID card for an additional fee of $20. If your fast track your 
services, your driver’s license or ID will be processed within three business days, and you should receive 
your card via UPS within 10 business days. An adult must sign for your card when it is delivered. 
You may not fast track your services when applying for the first time, for enhanced driver’s licenses and 
ID cards, or when upgrading a license. 

 
 
Chapter 2: Your vehicle 
Your vehicle 
Your car must have this equipment 
Windshield 
wipers 
Safety glass 
Rearview mirror 
Horn 
License plate 
Headlights with 
high and low beams 
Turn signals 
Turn signals 
Bumper 
Bumper
Muﬄer 
License plate 
and light 
Red taillight 
red reﬂectors 
and stop light 
Two separate 
Seat belts 
ways to apply brakes 
Before you drive any vehicle on public roads, make sure it is fully equipped and in good condition. 
Get to know your vehicle. Read the owner’s manual and learn how to use all the equipment. Regularly 
check the lights, windshield wipers, horn and tires to make sure they work. Understand the functions of 
the gauges and warning lights. 
When you enter the vehicle, check your seat and mirrors to see if they need adjustment. Make sure pas-
sengers sit in positions that do not block your view or interfere with your driving. Adjust and buckle your 
seat belt and make sure all your passengers do the same. 
Vehicle requirements 
Brakes 
All cars and trucks must have at least two separate brake systems, like the foot brake and the parking/ 
emergency brake. 
Bumpers 
All private passenger vehicles must have front and rear bumpers. Pickup trucks and vans must have front 
bumpers and either rear bumpers or reflectors. 
Horn 
Your vehicle must have a working horn. Bells, sirens and whistles are not horns and can only be used 
by emergency vehicles. Use your horn to avoid a crash. Do not honk unnecessarily or to announce 
your arrival. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
22 

Chapter 2: Your vehicle
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Headlights and taillights 
All motor vehicles, except motorcycles, must have: 
■ Two white headlights that work on high and low beam. 
■ Red taillights that light up when you press the brake pedal. 
High beam headlights must make objects visible on the road at least 350 feet ahead. You must replace 
damaged headlights. A cracked lens can let moisture and dust in, reducing light and increasing glare for 
other drivers. Clean your headlights as often as you clean your windshield; dirty headlights can reduce 
light output by up to 75 percent. 
Have your headlights inspected at least once a year to ensure they are aimed correctly. Some headlights 
need an adapter or special settings. Check your owner’s manual for more information. Some vehicles 
have daytime running lights that turn on automatically to make your vehicle more visible during the  
day. Taillights and parking lights do not turn on automatically. 
Turn on your headlights at sunset and keep them on until sunrise. Use them during rain, snow, hail, 
sleet, fog or any time you cannot see the road ahead for at least 500 feet. 
License plate light 
A white light must illuminate the rear license plate so it is visible at night. 
Turn signals 
All of your vehicle’s turn signal lights must work. 
Prohibited lights 
Only certain vehicles can use blue lights, flashing lights and strobe lamps: 
■ Snowplows, road maintenance equipment and authorized emergency vehicles can use blue lights. 
■ Authorized emergency vehicles, school buses, road maintenance equipment, tow trucks, service 
vehicles and farm equipment can use flashing lights. 
■ School buses, snow removal equipment and rural mail carrier vehicles can use strobe lamps. 
Mufflers 
All motor vehicles must have mufflers to prevent sudden or prolonged loud noises, especially sharp 
popping or crackling sounds. Regularly check the muffler for carbon monoxide leaks. 
Rearview mirrors 
All passenger vehicles must have rearview mirrors. Vehicles like rental moving trucks, which do not  
allow a view through a rear window, must have an additional side mirror. Pickup trucks, often used  
for hauling, must also have an extra side mirror. This side mirror helps you see clearly when materials 
block the rearview mirror. 
Seat belts and airbags 
Make sure seat belts are clean and in good condition for all occupants. In Minnesota, all vehicles must 
have seat belts and everyone must use them. Airbags work with seat belts to prevent injuries but do not 
stop occupants from being ejected. Keep the dashboard free of clutter; objects can become dangerous  
if airbags inflate. 

Chapter 2: Your vehicle
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tires 
Tires must support your vehicle’s weight and grip the road properly. Inspect tires regularly for cuts, 
cracks, uneven wear, bald spots, bulges and punctures. Always carry a good spare tire and check its 
pressure often. Tires have less traction on gravel or dirt roads than on concrete or asphalt. 
Tires can lose up to 1 PSI of pressure every month. Check your tire pressure often and never drive 
with under-inflated tires. 
■ Find your vehicle’s recommended tire pressure on a sticker inside the driver’s door or in the 
owner’s manual. 
■ Check tire pressure before driving or at least three hours after driving. 
■ Insert a pressure gauge into the valve stem on your tire. The gauge will show the measured PSI. 
■ Compare the measured PSI to the PSI on the sticker inside the driver’s door or in the owner’s manual, 
not the PSI on the tire’s sidewall. 
■ If the measured PSI is above the recommended number, let air out until it matches. If below, add air 
until it reaches the proper number. 
■ Check your tires often for wear and damage. A tire is illegal if the tread is less than one-sixteenth 
inch deep. Use the penny test to check for wear: 
– Hold a penny with Abraham Lincoln’s body between your thumb and forefinger. 
– Place Lincoln’s head into a groove where the tread is the lowest. 
– If any part of Lincoln’s head is covered by the tread, your tires are legal and safe. If the tread 
is below that, your vehicle’s grip on the road in adverse conditions is greatly reduced. 
Windshield and windows 
Your view through windshields and windows must be clear and not obstructed by cracks, discoloration, 
steam, frost, ice or snow when driving. Do not hang objects between the driver and the windshield. 
Labels and stickers allowed by state law, such as state and national park stickers, safety inspection stickers 
and EZpass devices, can be placed on your windshield. 
Global positioning and other navigation systems can be mounted near the bottom part of the windshield. 
Driver feedback and safety-monitoring equipment can be mounted immediately behind, slightly above or 
slightly below the rearview mirror. Windshields cannot be made of, covered by or treated with materials 
that make the glass more reflective or reduce the amount of light passing through it. 
Any window tint applied to the side or rear windows after Aug. 1, 1985, must show the percentage of 
light transmitted and reflected. If it transmits less than 50 percent or reflects more than 20 percent of 
available light, you can only use it on the rear window of a pickup truck or the rear and side windows  
of a van, limousine or vehicle used by a funeral home. 
Windshield wipers and window defrosters 
A vehicle with a glass windshield must have working windshield wipers. Window defrosters are necessary 
to keep windows and the windshield clear of steam and frost. 
Wheel guards or fenders 
Passenger vehicles must have fenders or other wheel guards to prevent water, dirt and other material 
from being thrown into the air by the tires. 

Chapter 2: Your vehicle
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fuel efficient techniques 
Keep your car in good condition 
■ Tune your engine properly. 
■ Keep tires properly inflated. 
■ Use the recommended grade of motor oil. 
Drive efficiently 
■ Plan and combine errands into one trip. 
■ Drive sensibly; avoid speeding, rapid acceleration and sudden braking. 
■ Observe the speed limit. 
■ Remove unnecessary heavy items from your vehicle. 
■ Use cruise control on the highway. 
■ Use overdrive gears. 
■ Whenever possible, take public transportation, use carpools, rideshare, bike or walk. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3: Trafc laws and vehicle operation 
Minnesota traffic laws apply to everyone driving on public roads in this state. The following laws cover 
how to control and operate your vehicle. 
On all wide roads, you must drive on the right side of the road except: 
■ When passing another vehicle going in the same direction. 
■ When the right side of the road is closed for construction or repair. 
■ When the road has three marked lanes. 
■ When signs indicate the road is one-way. 
■ When you need to move over for an authorized vehicle parked or stopped on the road in accordance 
with the Move Over Law. 
Speed limits 
The faster you drive, the less time you have to react to events on the road. Driving at higher speeds  
increases the chance of crashes. You are more likely to get seriously injured or killed in a crash at  
high speed. 
Always obey the posted speed limit. 
Basic speed law: Minnesota’s basic speed law says you must drive at a speed that is reasonable for the  
current conditions, including weather, traffic and road conditions. Driving faster than the posted speed  
limit is illegal. The posted speed limit is the maximum speed allowed on that road. On two-lane highways 
with a speed limit of 55 mph or higher, you can increase your speed by 10 mph when lawfully passing  
another vehicle. 
Minimum speed limits: Some roads have minimum speed limits. It is illegal to drive slower than the 
posted minimum speed under normal conditions. 
Right-of-way: If you approach an intersection at an unlawful speed, you lose the right-of-way privilege 
associated with driving at a lawful speed. 
Speed limits under ideal conditions (unless otherwise indicated by signs): 
■ 10 mph — in alleys 
■ 30 mph — on urban or town roads 
■ 55 mph — in all other locations that are not specified in this list 
Special zones: 
■ In school zones, you must slow down when children are present. 
■ In work or construction zones, you must slow down and drive with care. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
26 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
27 
 
 
 
 
 
Speed limits and fines 
You can be fined for driving faster than the posted speed limit. Additional fines apply if you drive 
20 mph or more over the limit. If you drive over 100 mph, your driving privileges will be revoked for 
at least six months. 
Reduced speed 
You may need to reduce your speed in many driving situations. Remember, increasing speed decreases 
your field of vision and increases the risk of a crash. 
You must slow down when you approach or pass a stopped emergency vehicle with flashing emergency 
lights. A surcharge of at least $25 is added to the speeding fine if you break this law. Slow down for flag 
persons, pedestrians, barricades, flares or reflectors on the road. You must also slow down in bad 
weather and poor road conditions. 
Drive slower on narrow or winding roads, and when approaching a curve, hilltop or railroad crossing.  
On gravel or dirt roads, you need to slow down because it takes longer to stop and is easier to skid  
when turning. 
Speed limits on bridges 
Watch for and obey special speed limits and “No Passing” signs posted on bridges. 
Signaling 
When you want to change lanes or make a turn, use your signal to inform other drivers. Activate your 
signal at least 100 feet before turning. Keep signaling until you have completed the turn or lane change. 
Hand and arm signals 
During daylight hours, you can use hand and arm signals in addition to or instead of turn signals. 
Do not use hand signals at night or when driving a vehicle that blocks other drivers from seeing your 
hand signals. 
Left turn 
Right turn 
Stop 
Traffic lanes 
A traffic lane is a part of the street or highway wide enough for a vehicle or line of vehicles to drive 
safely. You are in a traffic lane whenever you drive on any street or highway. Lanes may not always 
be marked, but they exist whether marked or not. You must stay within a single traffic lane without 
weaving or straddling the lane markings. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changing lanes 
You often need to change lanes to turn, merge with traffic or do other driving activities. Changing lanes 
can be dangerous and must be done carefully. To stay safe, make sure you have space to the side behind 
and ahead of your vehicle before moving into another lane. Turn your head to check the lane you are 
moving into for vehicles. Don’t rely solely on mirrors; you may miss vehicles in your blind spots. 
Blind spots 
Blind spots are areas around your vehicle where your view is blocked. You cannot see pedestrians or 
other vehicles in your rearview or side mirrors when they are in these spots. The design of your vehicle 
and the position of the roof pillars determine the location of your blind spots. Dirty windshields and  
glaring lights can also create temporary blind spots. 
Know where your blind spots are. Before changing lanes or turning, quickly turn your head to look for 
hidden pedestrians or vehicles. Avoid driving in other drivers’ blind spots. Be especially aware of blind 
spots when driving near commercial vehicles. 
Turns 
Drivers who turn improperly cause many traffic crashes. Move safely into the correct lane well ahead 
of the place where you will make the actual turn. 
■ Slow down before turning. Signal your intent at least 100 feet before the turn. Signals let pedestrians 
and drivers know what you plan to do. 
■ While waiting to turn, keep your wheels straight and your foot on the brake. If your vehicle is struck 
from behind, you are less likely to be pushed into oncoming traffic. 
■ Continue signaling until you begin your turn. 
■ Do not make sudden turns from the wrong lane. 
■ Watch for traffic or obstacles in the road you plan to enter. 
■ Always finish your turn in the correct lane. 
■ If the car ahead of you is signaling for a left turn, slow down and prepare to stop. 
■ When waiting to make a left turn at a green light with oncoming traffic, position your car into the 
intersection where your body is even with the curb line. You may only be able to make the turn 
when the light changes to yellow. 
Turning on a red light 
Right turn 
At many intersections, you can make a right turn while the traffic light is red. Make sure you are in 
the correct lane and come to a complete stop. Do not turn if there is a “No Turn on Red” sign. Check 
for pedestrians and traffic in all directions to make sure your path is clear. Watch for oncoming cars 
making left turns in front of you. Sometimes oncoming traffic will have a green arrow before your 
light turns green. 
Left turn 
You can make a left turn from a one-way street onto another one-way street while the traffic light is red 
in certain situations. Before turning, come to a complete stop, make sure the intersection is clear and 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
29 
 
 
 
 
Left turns 
Left turn: After checking traffic behind you and 
signaling your intent, move into the lane closest 
to the center line. If there are no lines marking 
the lanes, move your vehicle to the right of the 
center of the road. Look right and left before 
starting the turn. Yield right of way, if necessary. 
Turn the steering wheel hand-over-hand, and 
complete the turn in the first lane right of the 
center line. 
Right turns 
Right turn: After checking traffic behind you 
and signaling your intent, move close to the 
right curb. Look right and left before beginning 
the turn. Yield right of way, if necessary. 
Turn the steering wheel hand-over-hand, 
and complete the turn in the lane next to 
the curb. 
Two approaching left turns 
From a one-way road onto a two-way road 
From two-way road onto a one-way road 
From a one-way road onto a one-way road 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multiple turn lanes 
Multiple turn lanes: If there are signs or lane markings for two or more turning lanes, 
stay in your lane during the turn. 
yield to any pedestrians or vehicles. Traffic must be allowed to travel in the direction you are turning. 
When turning on a red light: 
■ Yield to traffic and pedestrians. 
■ If a “No Turn on Red” sign is posted, wait until the light is green to turn. 
Roundabouts 
Roundabouts are designed to improve traffic flow and provide safer intersections than normal four-way 
stops. When approaching a roundabout: 
■ Slow down as you approach. 
■ For multi-lane roundabouts, choose the correct lane before entering. 
■ Yield to pedestrians and bicyclists crossing the road. 
■ Watch for signs or markings that require or prohibit certain movements. 
When entering a roundabout: 
■ Yield to vehicles already in the roundabout. Do not enter until all traffic from the left has cleared. 
■ Drive counterclockwise until you reach your exit. 
■ Do not stop, pass or change lanes within the roundabout. 
■ If an emergency vehicle approaches, exit the roundabout immediately and then pull over. 
For large vehicles: 
■ A vehicle longer than 40 feet or wider than 10 feet, or any combination vehicle, may deviate from the 
lane as needed to drive through the roundabout, while being cautious of other traffic. 
■ In multi-lane roundabouts, if two large vehicles approach and drive through at the same time, 
the driver on the right must yield to the vehicle on the left, reducing speed or stopping if necessary. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
31 
Single-lane roundabout 
Two-lane roundabout 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J-turns 
J-turns are used to decrease fatalities and injuries caused by broadside crashes on four-lane divided highways. 
At a J-turn, drivers on the side street approaching the divided highway always make a right turn. To cross 
the highway or make a left turn from the side street: 
1. Come to a complete stop. 
2. Turn right onto the highway. 
3. Enter the designated left-turn lane that leads to the median opening and complete a U-turn. 
When making the right turn, you can cross both lanes and move into the left-turn lane in one motion 
when it is safe to do so. This minimizes the time spent in the through lanes of the divided highway. When 
completing the U-turn, you must yield to oncoming traffic and stop if necessary, before entering the through 
lanes of the divided highway. 
Crossing a divided highway using a J-turn 
Left-hand turn onto divided highway using a J-turn 
Divided highway 
Crossing a rural divided highway can be dangerous. If there is enough space between the two roadways, 
you can cross one half and wait in the middle until it is safe to cross the second half. If there is no traffic 
from either direction, you can cross both roadways if it is safe. When waiting between the roadways, stay 
to the right of the center. When turning left onto a divided highway, use the same procedure as crossing 
straight across. Ensure there is enough space from oncoming traffic, so you do not impede them as you get 
up to speed after completing your turn. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Divided highway — left turn across traffic 
U-turns 
A U-turn is a 180-degree turn that reverses your direction of travel. Do not make a U-turn unless you 
can do so without disrupting other traffic. “No U-Turn” signs indicate where U-turns are not allowed. 
You must not make U-turns on interstate freeways. They are also illegal near the tops of hills and on 
curves where other drivers cannot see you from 1,000 feet away. 
When necessary, a driver may turn the vehicle into the farthest lane and temporarily use the shoulder 
to make a U-turn on a roadway with two or more lanes in the same direction. 
Right-hand lane travel 
When driving on a road with one lane in your direction, if you are going slow enough to create a traffic 
hazard, you must drive as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the road. 
On highways with more than one lane in the same direction, drive in the right-hand lane when available. 
If you are in the left-most lane, move out of the lane to allow another vehicle to pass when practical. 
The exceptions to this rule are: 
■ When overtaking and passing another vehicle in the same direction. 
■ When preparing for a left turn at an intersection, or into a private road or driveway. 
■ When preparing to exit an expressway, freeway or interstate highway on the left side. 
■ When driving an authorized emergency vehicle. 
■ When directed by an official traffic control device, a peace officer or in a highway work zone. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Passing 
Improper passing causes many crashes. Be extra cautious when passing at night, when visibility is poor 
and when the road is slippery. 
On two-lane roads where passing is allowed and traffic moves in both directions, you may pass on the 
left side of vehicles ahead of you. Do not exceed the speed limit to complete a pass. However, on two-
lane highways with a posted speed limit of 55 mph or higher, the speed limit increases by 10 mph when 
you are lawfully passing another vehicle in the same direction. 
When preparing to pass 
■ Ensure there is a safe distance between your vehicle and oncoming traffic. 
■ Check behind you to see if other drivers are preparing to pass you. 
Use your left turn signal before moving into the left lane to pass. Use your right turn signal after passing 
and before returning to the right lane. Return to the right lane when you can see the entire vehicle you 
have just passed in your rearview mirror. You must return to the right side of the road before coming 
within 100 feet of an oncoming vehicle. 
Do not pass in locations where a “No Passing Zone” sign is posted or where there is a solid yellow line 
on your side of the center line. Double solid yellow lines mean no passing is allowed in either direction. 
Do not pass 
■ On a curve or hill where you cannot clearly see the road ahead for at least 700 feet. 
■ Within 100 feet of an intersection, underpass, tunnel or railroad crossing. 
■ When you are about to meet a vehicle coming toward you from the opposite direction. 
■ When another driver is trying to pass you, stay in your own lane and do not increase speed. 
Passing on the right 
A driver may pass on the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
■ When it is safe to do so. Do not pass by driving in a bicycle lane, on the shoulder, or off the pavement 
or main part of the road. 
■ When the vehicle you are overtaking is making or about to make, a left turn. 
■ On a street or highway with enough space to allow two or more lanes of moving vehicles to travel 
in each direction. 
■ On a one-way street or any road where traffic moves in one direction only. You may only pass 
on the right if there are no obstructions and the road is wide enough for two or more lanes of 
moving vehicles. 
Backing up 
Backing up is not allowed on freeways or expressways, except for emergency vehicles on duty. Backing 
up on public roads can result in a charge of reckless or careless driving. 
If you must back out of a driveway onto a public road, back into the nearest lane and drive forward 
from there. Never back into or across lanes of traffic unless you are sure it is safe. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before you back up: 
■ Walk around your vehicle to make sure nothing is behind it. 
■ Look to the front, sides and rear. 
■ Continue looking out the rear window while backing up. Do not rely solely on your mirrors or 
back-up camera. 
■ Back slowly into the nearest traffic lane. 
Parking 
When you parallel park, your vehicle’s wheels closest to the side of the road should be no more than 
12 inches from the curb. Turn the front wheels toward the curb or shoulder, place the vehicle in park 
and engage the parking brake. This way, if the vehicle comes out of park or the brakes fail, the wheels 
will help it roll toward the curb or off the road, not into a traffic lane. 
Parking is not allowed in the following areas: 
■ Within intersections 
■ On a crosswalk or sidewalk 
■ Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection 
■ Within 30 feet of any flashing light, stop sign or traffic control signal on the side of a public road 
■ Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing 
■ Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant 
■ Alongside or across the street from any excavation site or obstacle if your vehicle would be in the 
way of traffic 
■ At the street end of a driveway 
■ On any bridge 
■ Within any highway tunnel 
■ On the traffic side of any vehicle parked at a curb or at the edge of a highway. This is known as 
“double parking” 
■ Beside a curb that is painted yellow or where official “No Parking” signs are posted 
■ In front of mailboxes (refer to city/local ordinances) 
Exiting a parked vehicle 
When you are stopped or parked on the side of a road, do not open any doors until you have checked to 
make sure it is safe and will not interfere with other traffic. Look for vehicles, motorcycles, bicyclists and 
pedestrians that may be approaching your vehicle. Do not leave any door on the side closest to moving 
traffic open longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parking on a hill 
When the front of a parked 
vehicle points downhill, 
wheels should be turned 
toward the curb or shoulder 
of the road. 
Parallel parking 
When the front of a parked 
vehicle points uphill, and 
there is a curb, wheels 
should be turned away 
from the curb. 
When the front of a parked 
vehicle points uphill, and 
there is no curb, wheels 
should be turned toward 
the shoulder of the road. 
1. Stop even with 
the car ahead 
and about one 
and a half feet 
away from it. 
2. Turn wheel to 
right sharply, 
back up slowly. 
3. When clear of 
car ahead, turn 
wheel sharply 
to left and 
continue to 
back up slowly. 
4. Turn wheel 
sharply to right 
and pull toward 
curb in center 
of space. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Highway parking 
If you are parking on state highways or freeways, you must move your vehicle away from the main part 
of the road. If your vehicle cannot be moved, use visible markers or signals to prevent damage and harm 
to other drivers. 
If you park on the highway at night, or any time lights are needed. You must have at least one white or 
amber front light and one red taillight illuminated on your vehicle. Both lights must be visible from at 
least 500 feet. Use parking lights or hazard warning lights to alert other drivers. Set headlights on parked 
vehicles to low beam. 
Passenger safety 
It is your responsibility as the driver to ensure the safety of all passengers. Insist that everyone wears 
seat belts. You must make sure children are buckled into an age-appropriate child restraint system. 
Seat belt laws 
The seat belt is the most important safety equipment in your vehicle. In Minnesota, all vehicles must 
have seat belts, and everyone must use them. You as the driver and all of your passengers, including 
those in the back seat, must wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt. Law enforcement can stop 
motorists solely for seat belt violations. 
If you do not wear a seat belt, consider the following: 
■ Your chances of being killed or injured in a crash are four times greater. 
■ You can be killed in a crash even at speeds as low as 12 mph. 
■ Seat belts prevent occupants from being ejected in a crash. People thrown from vehicles are likely 
to die or suffer serious injuries. 
You are not legally required to wear a seat belt if you are: 
■ Driving a passenger vehicle in reverse. 
■ In a seat where all seat belts are being used by other passengers. 
■ Possessing a written certificate from a physician for medical reasons. 
■ Engaged in work that involves frequent exiting and entering the vehicle, as long as you do not 
drive faster than 25 mph. 
■ A rural mail carrier delivering mail for the U.S. Postal Service. 
■ Driving or riding in a pickup truck while engaged in farm work. 
■ Driving a vehicle made before Jan. 1, 1965. 
Use seat belts correctly 
You are more likely to survive a car crash if you use both the lap and shoulder belts together. 
■ Lap belt: Adjust the lap belt to fit snugly across your hipbones or upper thighs. It should never be 
positioned across your abdomen or the soft part of your stomach. 
■ Shoulder belt: Adjust the shoulder belt to fit snugly across your chest and the middle of your shoulder. 
When positioned correctly, the seat belt is much less likely to cause injuries in the event of a crash. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infant and child safety seat laws 
The back seat is the safest place in most vehicles. Children under 13 must ride in the back if it is available. 
Car seats and booster seats, also known as child safety restraint systems, must be federally approved and 
installed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
■ Children under 2 years of age must ride in a rear-facing car seat until they reach the weight or height 
limit of the car seat. If they are too heavy or too tall for the car seat, they must switch to a front-facing 
car seat. Once they turn 2 years old, if they are under both the height and weight limits, they must 
stay in the rear-facing car seat until they are too tall or heavy for the seat. 
■ Children older than 2 who exceed the rear-facing height or weight limit of the car seat must sit in 
a forward-facing car seat until they reach the height or weight limit (typically 40-60 pounds, depending 
on the manufacturer). 
■ A child from 4 to 9 years old must use a booster seat and be secured with a safety belt if they are too 
tall or too heavy for the car seat. 
■ When a child is 9 years old, or they exceed the weight or height limit of the booster seat, they 
must sit without the booster and be secured with a seat belt. 
Other child passenger safety guidelines 
■ Do not use a safety seat that has been in a crash. 
■ Child restraint systems expire six years from the date of manufacture. Some seats have a specific 
expiration date stamped on them. If no date is listed, follow the six-year recommendation. 
■ Never place rear-facing infant seats in front of an active airbag. 
■ Do not hold children on a passenger’s lap while riding in a vehicle. 
■ Children should not ride in the cargo area of a truck or station wagon. 
Never leave children unattended in a vehicle 
Never leave children or vulnerable adults alone in a motor vehicle. Here are some dangers that 
could occur: 
■ Unattended occupants could engage the vehicle and cause a crash. 
■ Temperatures can reach dangerous extremes inside a vehicle, leading to death or serious injuries 
from heat or cold. 
■ The vehicle could be stolen or broken into by someone unaware it is occupied. 
■ Someone could break into the vehicle and abduct or harm the occupants. 
Leaving your vehicle unattended 
Protect yourself from theft. Lock your doors and take your keys with you. Do not leave the vehicle 
running or leave the keys in the ignition or inside the vehicle. Do not leave valuables, or anything that 
looks valuable, inside the vehicle. 

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Animal safety 
You are responsible for the safety of animals in your vehicle. Be aware of the dangers of leaving animals 
unattended in vehicles during warm weather. Do not leave pets in vehicles, especially on very hot or cold 
days. Temperature extremes can be very dangerous to animals. 
Airbags 
An airbag is a supplemental restraint system. Airbags work with seat belts to prevent injuries but are not 
designed to keep occupants from being ejected. For safety reasons, children under age 13 must ride in 
the back seat if it is available. 
Airbag safety suggestions 
Try to keep at least 10 inches between yourself and the steering wheel. Keep your hands at the  
8 and 4 o’clock or 9 and 3 o’clock positions on the steering wheel. Avoid the 10 and 2 o’clock position. 
Keep your thumbs turned out on the steering wheel. 
Move front passenger seats as far back as possible. Read your operator’s manual before driving or riding 
in a vehicle with airbags. 
For more information about seat belts, airbags and car safety seats, visit the Department of Public Safety’s 
Office of Traffic Safety at ots.dps.mn.gov. 
Do not litter 
It is illegal to throw items from your vehicle onto streets, roads, and public or private land. Do not throw, 
leave, place or dump any items, including: cigarettes, fireworks, debris, snow, ice, glass, nails, tacks, wire, 
cans, garbage, papers, ashes, refuse, carcasses, offal, trash or rubbish. 
What to do in a traffic crash 
If you are involved in a crash, you must take certain actions to ensure safety and comply with the law: 
■Stop. If possible, pull out of the driving lane onto the shoulder. Turn off the ignition to reduce the
risk of fire.
■Protect yourself and the crash scene. Use emergency warning lights, flares or a flashlight to warn
other drivers of danger.
■Call for help. If someone is injured or killed, call the nearest law enforcement agency or 911 as
quickly as possible.
■If you are able and qualified, administer first aid. If not, make anyone who is injured comfortable.
You are required by law to provide reasonable assistance to crash victims.
■Exchange information. Provide your name, address, date of birth and vehicle registration number
to other drivers and any law enforcement officer at the scene. Show your driver’s license to anyone
who asks for it and to any law enforcement officer.
■Provide insurance information. If asked, give the name and address of your insurance carrier and
the name of your agent. Give this information to the investigating law enforcement officer. If you do
not have it with you, provide it within 72 hours.
■Property damage only: If the crash only results in property damage, you do not need to notify law
enforcement. If your vehicle is disabled, have it towed as soon as possible. If you damage property
other than a vehicle, inform the property owner.

Chapter 3: Traffic laws and vehicle operation
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insurance 
Owners of motor vehicles driven on public roads must carry no-fault and liability insurance. You must 
have valid proof of insurance in the vehicle at all times. Failing to provide proof of insurance when asked 
by a law enforcement officer can lead to revocation of your driver’s license and vehicle registration. 
If your driving privileges are revoked for lack of insurance, you must: 
■ Pass a written test. 
■ Pay a $30 reinstatement fee in addition to any court fines or citations. 
■ Apply for a new driver’s license. 
■ Submit an insurance certificate from your insurance company. 
Operating an uninsured vehicle can result in the revocation of license plates and vehicle registration. 
Your driving privileges may be revoked for up to one year. If convicted of operating an uninsured vehicle, 
you may be fined up to $1,000 and sentenced to up to 90 days in jail. 
Motorcycle insurance 
Motorcycle drivers in this state must have liability insurance that covers property damage and injuries 
to other people. No-fault and uninsured driver insurance coverage is optional. You can also get insurance 
for damage, loss or theft of the motorcycle. 
Registering your vehicle 
If you are a Minnesota resident, all of your motor vehicles that are driven on public roads must  
be registered with DVS. You have up to 60 days after becoming a resident to register your vehicle  
in Minnesota. 
To register your vehicle, bring the current vehicle title or registration card and your driver’s license 
or other valid identification to your nearest deputy registrar’s office. 
Cell phones 
You may not use a wireless communication device, like a cell phone, to compose, read or send electronic 
messages while driving. Electronic messages include emails, text messages and instant messages. You 
also may not access the internet. 
Exceptions: 
■ Using the device to get emergency assistance 
■ Reporting a crash or crime 
■ Using the device in voice-activated or hands-free mode 
If you are convicted of two or more violations of using a wireless communication device to compose, 
read or send messages while driving, you will be required to pay a $275 fine in addition to the court-
specified fine. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4: Sharing the road 
The following laws and safety information apply to situations involving other vehicles and pedestrians. 
Stopping 
Stop signs: 
■ Come to a complete stop at stop signs. 
■ If there is a marked stop line, stop before the line. 
■ If there is a pedestrian crosswalk, stop before entering the crosswalk. 
■ Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians, bicyclists and traffic before proceeding. 
Obstructed view: 
■ If your view of the intersection is obstructed, be prepared to stop again for traffic or pedestrians 
in your path. 
You must also come to a complete stop: 
■ Before entering a road from an alley, private driveway, parking lot or parking ramp. Always stop 
before crossing a sidewalk or crosswalk. 
■ At an intersection or crosswalk with a traffic signal displaying a red light. Wait until the light turns 
green and your path is clear before proceeding. 
■ At any intersection or crosswalk, marked or unmarked, where a pedestrian or bicyclist is crossing 
the road. Stay stopped until they have passed your lane. 
■ At a flashing red traffic light. Treat it as you would a stop sign. 
■ At a freeway ramp meter when the light is red. 
■ At a railroad crossing with a stop sign. 
■ When a flag person or traffic device directs you to stop. 
■ At a bridge that has been raised to open a path for boats. 
Stopping for a school bus 
School buses have yellow and red lights that flash alternately to warn drivers they are stopping to load 
or unload students. 
Flashing yellow lights 
Bus drivers will activate flashing yellow lights at least 100 feet before a school bus stops in a speed zone 
of 35 mph or less. They will activate the lights at least 300 feet before it stops in a speed zone of more 
than 35 mph. It is against the law to pass on the right side of a school bus while it is displaying red or  
yellow flashing lights. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
41 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
42 
 
 
 
Flashing red lights 
Flashing red lights warn drivers that the school bus is loading or unloading students. When you see a 
school bus that is stopped with its red lights flashing and its stop arm extended, you must stop your  
vehicle at least 20 feet from the bus. 
Regardless of whether you are facing the front or back of the bus, you must remain stopped until 
the stop arm is retracted, and the red lights stop flashing. If you don’t, you can be charged with a 
misdemeanor. If convicted, you must pay a fine of at least $500 and lose your driving privileges. 
Passing a school bus 
It is illegal to pass a school bus when its red lights are flashing and its stop arm is extended. If you are 
driving on a divided roadway, you do not need to stop for a school bus with red lights flashing if it is on 
the opposite side of the divider. A law enforcement officer with probable cause to believe you have 
violated this law may arrest you within four hours of the violation. 
STOP 
AAA-000 
AAA-000 
STOP 
222 
SCHOOL BUS
SCHOOL BUS 
Two lane, non-divided 
Multilane non-divided 
Divided highway 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vehicle owner may be penalized 
When your vehicle is used to violate the school bus stop arm law, you are guilty of a petty misdemeanor  
if you own or lease the vehicle. However, if you can prove that another person was driving the vehicle  
at the time, the driver will be charged with the violation. 
When you apply for a driver’s license, you must certify, by signing the application, that you understand 
the requirement to stop for a school bus and are aware of the penalties for violating this law. 
School safety patrol 
When you see a student safety patrol helping schoolmates cross a street or highway, you must come to 
a complete stop. You must also stop for adult crossing guards displaying a stop sign or flag. It is illegal to 
drive through a line of children crossing the road, even if a school safety patrol is not present. Violating 
this law is a misdemeanor. A second violation within a year is a gross misdemeanor. 
School bus flagger 
You must stop for a school bus flagger directing traffic to allow school buses to leave school property. 
After being stopped by a school bus flagger, you may not proceed until directed to do so by the flagger 
or a police officer. 
Right of way and yielding 
Right-of-way and yielding laws help traffic flow smoothly and safely. They are based on courtesy and 
common sense. Violating these laws is a leading cause of traffic crashes. 
■ Intersections without traffic lights or signals: When you reach an intersection at the same time as 
another driver, the driver on the left must yield to the one on the right. 
■ All-way stops or flashing red traffic lights: When you reach an intersection at the same time as 
another driver, the driver on the left must yield to the one on the right. 
■ Left turns: When you want to make a left turn, you must yield to vehicles approaching from the 
opposite direction that are in the intersection or close enough to pose a risk of a crash. 
■ Green arrow signal for left turn: When a green arrow signals that you are allowed to turn left, you 
must yield to other vehicles or pedestrians already in the intersection. After yielding, you may continue 
in the direction of the arrow. 
■ Uncontrolled “T” intersections: When you approach an uncontrolled “T” intersection, you must yield 
to all cross traffic if you are the one turning. 
■ Entering a public road from a private road or driveway: You must stop and yield to pedestrians 
and traffic. 
■ Transit and metro mobility buses: When driving in the right lane, you must yield to transit and metro 
mobility buses merging from a bus stop or shoulder. This includes yielding to any school bus trying 
to enter the lane from a shoulder, a right-turn lane, or other location where the school bus has stopped 
to load or unload passengers. The school bus must use the left turn signal to indicate intent to move 
into the right-hand lane. 
■ Funeral processions: When a funeral procession identifies itself with headlights or hazard warning 
lights, you must yield to the entire procession. 
■ Pedestrians: You must yield to pedestrians crossing at intersections and crosswalks, whether marked 
or unmarked. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
44 
 
 
 
 
Yield to emergency vehicles 
When an emergency vehicle (such as an ambulance, fire truck or police car) with flashing red lights and 
sounding a siren or bell approaches your vehicle on a two-way road, you must pull to the right and stop. 
On a one-way road, pull to the nearest side and stop. If you are in an intersection, proceed through it  
before stopping. Remain stopped until all emergency vehicles have passed. 
A law enforcement officer with probable cause to believe you have violated this law may arrest you  
within four hours of the violation. 
You do not need to stop if the emergency vehicle is separated from your lane of traffic by a physical  
barrier like a fence, wall or median strip. 
Passing parked emergency and service vehicles 
When an emergency vehicle with flashing lights is stopped on or next to a road with two lanes in the 
same direction, the “Move Over Law” requires you to move to the lane farthest away from the vehicle 
if it is safe to do so. Emergency vehicles include tow trucks, ambulances, fire trucks and police cars. 
If you cannot move a lane away or are on a street or highway with only one lane in your direction, 
slow down and pass with caution. 
You must follow the same rule when approaching stalled or disabled vehicles and when passing  
parked vehicles such as service patrol vehicles, road maintenance vehicles, utility company vehicles,  
construction vehicles, postal vehicles, or solid waste and recycling vehicles that are stopped with  
warning lights activated. 
Following firefighting vehicles 
Only vehicles on official emergency business are allowed to follow within 500 feet of a firefighting vehicle 
on an emergency run. Do not drive over an unprotected fire hose unless directed by a law enforcement 
officer or fire department official. 
Following other vehicles 
You must maintain a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front of you. You must  
be able to stop or turn to avoid a collision. Consider weather, traffic and road conditions when  
determining a safe following distance. Use the three-second rule to help maintain a safe following  
distance. (See “Three-Second Rule” in Chapter 6 of this manual.) 
Careless and reckless driving 
Careless driving means driving or stopping a vehicle in a way that endangers the lives and safety of 
people or property. Reckless driving means driving a vehicle while knowingly disregarding a substantial 
and unjustifiable risk that may harm others or their property, including racing or contest driving. Racing 
is defined as intentionally comparing or contesting relative speeds by operating one or more vehicles, 
regardless of whether the speed exceeds the speed limit. 
If you are charged with careless or reckless driving, you will be tried in court for a misdemeanor. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What to do and expect when stopped by law enforcement 
Being stopped by a law enforcement officer can be stressful, but knowing what to do can ensure a safe 
interaction for everyone. 
When you see emergency lights behind you: 
■ Stay calm. 
■ Slow down and activate your turn signal. 
■ Pull to the right shoulder as soon as safely possible; if on a multi-lane road and closer to the left 
shoulder, move to the left shoulder if there is a full lane to park. 
■ Avoid stopping on a bridge, curve or within the lane of traffic. 
■ If stopped after dark, turn on your vehicle’s interior light. 
■ Keep all doors shut and remain in the vehicle unless directed otherwise by the officer. 
■ Keep your hands on the steering wheel so they are easily visible. 
■ Give the officer your full attention. 
The officer may ask to see your identification (driver’s license, photo ID, etc.) and proof of insurance. If 
the documents are out of reach, tell the officer where they are located before reaching for them. 
When the officer completes their interaction with you, they may issue a verbal warning, written warning 
or traffic citation that may include a fine. If you disagree with the citation, do not argue with the officer. 
You can explain your point of view in court. If you have questions about the warning or citation, ask the 
officer before the interaction is completed. Avoid getting out of your vehicle after the officer walks away. 
Failure to follow or comply with any lawful order or direction of a law enforcement officer is illegal and 
can result in your arrest. Do not resist if taken into custody. 
The enforcement of traffic laws helps change unsafe driving behavior, reduces crashes and injuries, and 
saves lives. If you receive a warning or citation, the intent is to deter future illegal or unsafe behavior and 
keep roadways safe. Clear communication from all involved parties can make a traffic stop safe. 
If you have a firearm in the vehicle: 
■ Keep your hands on the steering wheel in a visible location. 
■ When the officer first approaches, inform them that you have a firearm and where it is located, 
while keeping your hands on the steering wheel. 
■ Do not reach for the firearm. The officer may take possession of the weapon for safety reasons 
until the interaction is complete. 
■ Do not make sudden movements or search for your documents; wait for the officer’s instructions. 
You should not: 
■ Reach around inside the vehicle. If you need to reach for an item, tell the officer what you need 
to locate and wait for verbal permission before doing so. 
■ Get out of the vehicle unexpectedly or approach the officer. If you need to exit your vehicle, ask 
the officer verbally and wait for permission before exiting. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What to expect during a traffic stop: 
While every traffic stop varies, you can generally expect the officer to: 
■ Greet you. 
■ Identify themselves as a law enforcement officer. 
■ Obtain your driver’s license and proof of insurance. 
■ Inform you of the reason for the stop and explain the circumstances for issuing a citation or warning. 
■ Check the validity and authenticity of your driver’s license. 
Acceptable forms of identification: 
■ Minnesota driver’s license 
■ Out-of-state driver’s license 
■ Temporary license 
■ Learner’s permit 
■ Military ID 
■ Consulate/International driver’s license 
Possible outcomes of a traffic stop: 
Depending on the nature of the stop, the officer may issue you a citation, give you a warning or take 
you into custody. The citation will contain the specific code or statute and a description of the violation. 
You are not admitting guilt or responsibility by accepting a citation; you are acknowledging receipt 
of the citation and promising to appear in court if required. All citations will be referred to a local 
jurisdiction for a hearing. You can use the court system to address criminal or civil matters and may 
have the option of a diversion program, such as driver education training. 
Conduct and complaints: 
Law enforcement officers are expected to maintain professionalism during a traffic stop. If you have 
questions or concerns about the officer’s conduct, contact the officer’s law enforcement agency or 
supervisor using the officer information on the citation. 
Fleeing a police officer 
Fleeing a police officer in a motor vehicle is illegal and dangerous. Violating this law is a felony. If you 
do so, you may be sentenced to up to three years and one day in prison, fined up to $5,000 or both. 
If someone is killed or injured while fleeing: 
■ If a death occurs: You may be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison, fined up to $20,000 or both. 
■ If great bodily harm occurs: You may be sentenced to up to seven years in prison, fined up to 
$14,000 or both. 
■ If substantial bodily harm occurs: You may be sentenced to up to five years in prison, fined up to 
$10,000 or both. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Watch for pedestrians 
Whether you are driving on busy city streets, in rural towns or on highways, stay alert for pedestrians. 
■ Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing at intersections and crosswalks. 
■ Watch for pedestrians on roads with parked cars, during poor visibility and when children are present. 
■ If a pedestrian is in a marked or unmarked crosswalk, stop and wait until they have passed your lane. 
■ Watch for blind pedestrians who may have a white or metallic cane or a guide dog. Do not use your 
horn or rev your engine as it may distract them. 
It is illegal to pass a vehicle that has stopped for a pedestrian. If another vehicle has stopped, look 
for pedestrians in the crosswalk and be prepared to stop. Violating pedestrian right-of-way laws is 
a misdemeanor. A second violation within a year is a gross misdemeanor. 
Crosswalks 
Marked crosswalks have solid white lines on the road and may have road signs or flashing lights to  
warn you that you are approaching a crosswalk. 
Unmarked crosswalks are areas where a road intersects a sidewalk without solid lines painted on 
the road. 
When stopping at a marked or unmarked crosswalk, do not block the crosswalk with your vehicle. 
As a pedestrian, obey the traffic laws designed to keep you safe and help drivers see you. 
■ Obey traffic control signals at intersections. Stay a few feet back from the road when waiting for 
the WALK signal. 
■ Yield to vehicles within the intersection when the WALK signal is activated. 
■ Make your intention to cross clear. Make eye contact with the driver and ensure they yield the 
right-of-way before crossing. 
■ Use sidewalks when available and in good condition. 
■ When crossing a road without crosswalks, yield to all vehicles on the road. 
– Stay out of traffic lanes when possible and make way for traffic on the road. 
– If walking on the road is necessary, stay on the left side or face oncoming traffic. 
■ When walking at night or in poor visibility conditions: 
– Wear light-colored clothing with reflective material or carry a flashlight to help drivers see you. 
– Be prepared to avoid drivers who do not see you. Pedestrians have the right-of-way within 
intersections and crosswalks, but motorists may not see you in time to stop. Glare from the sun 
and other factors can make it difficult for drivers to see pedestrians in time to stop. 
Sharing the road with bicyclists 
Bicycles are legal vehicles on Minnesota roads and share the same rights and responsibilities as 
other vehicles. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bicycle lanes 
Bicycle lanes are designed to separate bicycle traffic from normal vehicle traffic. It is illegal to drive in 
bicycle lanes except to park (when permitted), to enter or leave the road, or to prepare for a turn. Before 
crossing a bicycle lane, make sure it is safe. You must yield to approaching bicyclists. When the bicycle lane 
is clear, signal your intention to turn and then move into the bicycle lane before making the turn. 
Passing a bicyclist 
Use caution when passing a bicyclist. You must keep at least 3  feet between the side of your car and the 
bicyclist. Make sure the bicyclist is not signaling or making a left turn before passing. You are allowed to 
cross the center of the roadway to pass a bicyclist, even in a no passing zone, when it is safe to do so. 
Bicycle laws 
Bicycle riders must obey all traffic laws. 
Note: Electric-assist bicycles are considered bicycles regarding rules of the road and where they may 
operate. Electric-assist bicycles have an electric motor that helps with pedaling. They differ from motorized 
bicycles (mopeds), which have a gas engine and must adhere to different rules (see pages 18 and 49). 
■ Ride in the same direction as the flow of traffic, not against it. 
■ Signal all turns and obey all traffic control signs, signals and devices. 
■ At stop signs, slow to a speed that allows stopping before entering the intersection or crosswalk. 
If no vehicle is nearby, you may turn or proceed without stopping. 
■ Travel just to the right of faster-moving traffic but move toward the center of the lane if there are 
hazards, when passing another vehicle or when making a left turn. 
■ Use the same hand and arm signals as other drivers. Signal a left turn by holding your left arm straight 
out. Signal a right turn by holding your left arm out and bending it upward. You can also hold your 
right arm straight out to indicate a right turn. You can signal that you are stopping by holding your 
left arm out and bending it toward the ground. 
■ Two people may ride next to each other as long as you do not impede traffic and stay within a 
single lane. 
■ Wear helmets for safety. 
■ Use legal lights and reflectors when riding at night. A bicycle may have a front lamp with a white 
flashing signal or a rear lamp with a red flashing signal or both. 
■ Bicycles may have tires with spikes or other features for increased traction. 
Riding on sidewalks and crosswalks 
■ Yield the right of way to pedestrians and give an audible signal before passing them. 
■ Do not ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business district unless allowed by local authorities. 
■ Local authorities may prohibit riding on any sidewalk or crosswalk. 
■ When riding on a sidewalk or crosswalk, you have the same rights and duties as pedestrians. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Traffic light malfunctions 
When you’re riding any kind of bicycle and are not detected by control systems at traffic lights and a 
signal change, you can proceed through the intersection after a reasonable amount of time if: 
■ The bicycle has come to a complete stop. 
■ The traffic signal shows a red light for an unreasonable time. 
■ The traffic signal appears to be malfunctioning or fails to detect the bicycle. 
■ No vehicle or person is approaching the roadway to be crossed or entered. 
■ Approaching vehicles or persons are far enough away to not pose an immediate hazard. 
This defense only applies to violations for entering or crossing an intersection controlled by a red light 
and does not defend against other civil or criminal actions. 
Safety tips for drivers 
■ Watch for bicyclists in intersections, on sidewalks, and when entering or leaving alleys and driveways. 
■ Be extra cautious of bicycle traffic at night. 
Motorized bicycles 
A “motorized bicycle” is a moped and is defined by its speed capacity, which is 30 mph or less. The rules 
that apply to bicycle riding generally apply to motorized bicycles. Motorized bicycles are not allowed on 
sidewalks, freeways, or lanes and trails designated for pedestrians and bicycles. 
Sharing the road with motorcyclists 
Motorcyclists must obey the same traffic laws as other drivers. 
■ Judging speed and distance: Motorcycles are smaller than cars, making it difficult to judge their 
speed and distance when approaching. 
■ Following distance: Your following distance from a motorcycle should be the same as, or greater 
than, your following distance from other vehicles. Riders may experience difficulty controlling the 
motorcycle, which could result in weaving. Allow maneuvering room to avoid hitting a motorcyclist. 
■ Moving into a lane: When you prepare to move into a lane in front of a motorcycle, allow as much 
space from the rear of your vehicle as you would for a car. 
■ When a motorcyclist passes: If a motorcyclist attempts to pass you, maintain your lane position 
and speed, and allow the rider to complete the pass. 
■ Crowding a motorcyclist: Crowding a motorcyclist is illegal and dangerous. Never attempt to drive 
alongside a motorcycle in the same lane. 
■ Protection in crashes: Motorcycles do not provide the same protection in crashes as other vehicles. 
Crashes at urban intersections are the most common motorcycle-car collisions. Many occur when 
drivers fail to yield right of way and make a left turn in front of an oncoming motorcycle. 
■ Right-of-way laws: Right-of-way laws apply to motorcyclists, as well as other drivers. Motorcyclists 
may use high-occupancy vehicle lanes. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vulnerable road users 
Drivers need to watch out for more than pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcyclists; they also must pay 
attention to other vulnerable road users. These are people on highways, bikeways, sidewalks or trails 
who have less protection than those in cars. Vulnerable road users include people riding two- or three-
wheeled vehicles, using electric mobility devices, riding horses, walking or using motorized scooters. 
They don’t have seat belts or airbags, and are at a higher risk of injury in a crash. You must share the 
road safely with these users and any passengers they have. Vulnerable road users must also follow 
all traffic laws. 
Neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs) 
A Neighborhood Electric Vehicle (NEV) is an electric-powered vehicle with three or four wheels that 
can reach speeds between 20 and 25 mph. NEVs must be titled and registered with Driver Vehicle 
Services. Anyone with a Class D driver’s license may drive an NEV, but only on streets with speed limits 
of 35 mph or less. NEVs may not be used during a road test. 
Commercial vehicles 
A commercial vehicle is a motor vehicle or a combination of motor vehicles that weighs more than 
26,000 pounds and is used to transport passengers or property. Buses, including school buses of all 
sizes, and smaller vehicles with hazardous materials placards are also considered commercial vehicles. 
Passing a commercial vehicle 
Before passing a commercial vehicle, make sure you have safe clearance to the side, behind and ahead 
of your vehicle. 
■ Passing on a level highway: It takes three to five seconds longer to pass a commercial vehicle than 
a car. Allow enough time to pass and return to the right lane before coming within 100 feet of 
oncoming traffic. 
■ Do not pass: If you plan to exit or turn off the road soon, stay behind the commercial vehicle until 
you reach the exit. 
■ Passing while going uphill: Commercial vehicles often lose speed on an upgrade, making them 
easier to pass than a car. 
■ Passing while going downhill: Commercial vehicles increase speed on a downgrade. Allow more 
distance to pass. 
■ Complete your pass quickly: Do not remain alongside the commercial vehicle. Move back into 
your lane only when you can see the front of the commercial vehicle in your rearview mirror. 
Maintain your speed after passing. 
■ When a commercial vehicle passes you: Keep to the far side of your lane and slightly reduce your 
speed. Do not speed up while the commercial vehicle is passing. 
■ Meeting a commercial vehicle from the opposite direction: Stay as far to the right as possible to 
avoid a sideswipe crash and reduce wind turbulence between the vehicles. Turbulence will push 
the vehicles away from each other, not toward each other. 
■ Judging speed and distance: Because of their large size, commercial vehicles often appear to be 
traveling slower than they actually are. Many car-commercial vehicle collisions occur at intersections 
because the driver of the car misjudges the speed and distance of the commercial vehicle. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lane changing in front of commercial vehicles 
Changing lanes and cutting in too close in front of another vehicle is always dangerous but it’s especially 
dangerous to cut off a commercial bus or truck. If you move in quickly from either side, you’re likely to 
be in a blind spot, so the driver may not see you in time. Even if you’re visible, the vehicle may not be 
able to slow down quickly enough to avoid a crash because of the time it takes to stop. 
Following a commercial vehicle 
Commercial vehicles need more stopping distance than cars. 
■ Stopping distance: An average passenger car traveling at 55 mph can stop within 130 to 140 feet. 
A fully loaded tractor-trailer may need more than 400 feet to stop completely. 
■ Safe following distance: Following a commercial vehicle too closely reduces your ability to see the 
road ahead. Maintain a safe following distance and position your vehicle so the driver can see you 
in their side mirrors. This will also give you time to react if the commercial vehicle stops suddenly. 
■ Headlights at night: Commercial vehicles have large side mirrors that can reflect light. When following 
a commercial vehicle at night, always dim your headlights to avoid blinding the driver. 
■ Merging: When a commercial vehicle merges into traffic, it needs more time than a car to accelerate 
and reach normal speed. Be prepared to slow down or change lanes to allow the truck to merge safely. 
■ Stopping on an upgrade: If you stop behind a commercial vehicle on an upgrade, allow space for the 
truck to roll back slightly when it starts to move. Position your vehicle on the left side of your lane so 
the driver can see you in the side mirror. 
Commercial vehicles and wide turns 
Pay close attention to the turn signals of commercial vehicles. Many commercial vehicles make wide 
right turns and must sometimes leave an open space to the right just before turning. The rear wheels 
of a turning vehicle follow a shorter path than the front wheels, the longer the vehicle, the greater the 
difference. To avoid a collision, do not pass a commercial vehicle on the right side if there is a possibility 
that it might make a right turn. 
Commercial vehicle “no zones” 
If you are following a commercial vehicle, stay out of its “no zones” illustrated in the image below. These 
zones are blind spots to the front, sides and rear of the vehicle. Some truck drivers may not be able to 
see up to 20 feet in front of the cab, on either side of the trailer, and up to 200 feet to the rear. 
Patience around commercial vehicles 
Trucks and buses have operating restrictions and sometimes use technology like speed limiters. Honking, 
driving aggressively or weaving through traffic won’t make your trip faster but can cause dangerous 
distractions and crashes. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commercial vehicle “no zones” 
Railroad crossings 
Railroad crossings can be especially dangerous places for collisions. Because of the size and weight of a 
train, most vehicle-train collisions are deadly for the driver. Drivers should pay extra attention for trains 
or other on-track equipment when approaching and crossing railroad tracks. 
Railroad crossing warning devices 
Public railroad crossings have warning devices to let drivers know when railroad tracks are present. 
Warning signs and pavement markers indicate that you are approaching a railroad crossing. Signs near 
the track show how many tracks are present. When approaching a crossing, observe the tracks carefully 
and be prepared to stop when you see these markings. 
Flashing lights, bells and gates indicate that a train or other on-track equipment is approaching.  
When you see these lights or gates activated, do not proceed across the tracks. Stop your vehicle at  
least 10 feet from the nearest rail or gate. It is safe to cross when traffic ahead has moved and you  
can proceed without stopping within 10 feet past the rails. 
At some crossings, a flag person may control traffic while a train or other on-track equipment is 
approaching. Obey the flag person as you would a warning device. 
Special vehicles at railroad crossings 
Some vehicles, such as passenger vans, buses and larger trucks, are required to stop at all railroad 
tracks, whether or not a train is present. Do not pass these vehicles. It is illegal to pass any vehicle 
within 100 feet of a railroad crossing. 
Railroad crossing safety 
More than one train may approach at the same time from different directions. When the last car of 
a train passes, do not proceed across the tracks until you are sure a second train is not approaching 
on another track. Look for trains in both directions at every railroad crossing, whether or not there 
are warning devices. 
When there is heavy traffic on both sides of a crossing, wait behind the tracks until you are sure you can 
make it to the other side without stopping on the tracks. Never race a train to get to the other side of the 
crossing. Trains cannot stop as quickly as motor vehicles. If you misjudge a train’s speed or your vehicle 
becomes stuck, you may be killed or severely injured. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Do not shift gears while your vehicle is within a crossing. If your vehicle has a manual transmission, shift 
down before entering the crossing. Motorcyclists should approach railroad crossings with caution. Do not 
swerve to get a better angle for crossing, as this may cause you to enter into a lane of oncoming traffic. 
Although trains are equipped with bright lights and loud horns, their distance and speed are difficult to 
judge, especially at night. If you feel hesitation about crossing railroad tracks when a train is in sight, 
stop and wait for the train to pass before proceeding. Never stop on railroad tracks. 
Emergency Notification System (ENS) for highway-rail grade crossings 
Every highway-rail crossing has an Emergency  
Notification System (ENS) sign that provides a 24/7 
telephone number to call to report problems or  
emergencies at the railroad location. 
The blue ENS sign is located on the railroad crossing 
posts or the metal control box near the tracks. The  
ENS is for emergencies that require stopping train  
traffic due to an obstruction or any other problem  
at the crossing. By providing the number on the sign, 
dispatchers can identify the exact location of the grade 
crossing and notify trains moving in that direction to 
either stop or slow down. 
Highway work zones 
Highway work zones are areas where road construction or maintenance work is underway. Machinery 
operates day and night and can be moving or stationary. Road workers set up zones with signs and road 
markings to direct traffic. Motorists must understand and react to these directions. 
■ Be patient: Expect delays, especially during peak travel times. 
■ Reduce speed: Watch out for workers and equipment and follow any flag person’s directions. 
Failure to obey a flag person in a work zone will result in a violation and financial penalty. 
■ Speed limits: Reduced speed limits are posted in many work zones. If there are no reduced speed 
limit postings, obey the posted speed limit. Disobeying the speed limit in a work zone will result in 
a violation and financial penalty. 
■ Stay alert: Watch for workers and equipment and adjust your lane position to keep a safe distance away. 
Late merge (zipper merge) 
The zipper merge is a driving strategy that requires drivers to change their mindset about merging. 
Traditionally, drivers have been taught to merge early when a lane is ending. Early merging leads to 
longer backups, more crashes and road rage incidents. 

Chapter 4: Sharing the road
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zipper merge procedure 
■ When you see the “lane closed ahead” sign and traffic is backing up, stay in your current lane until 
the point of merge. 
■ Take turns with other drivers to safely and smoothly merge into the remaining lane. 
■ When traffic is heavy and slow, it is safer to remain in your current lane until the point where traffic 
can take turns merging orderly. 
Benefits of the zipper merge 
■ Reduces the difference in speeds between two lanes, making lane changes easier and safer. 
■ Reduces the overall length of traffic backups by up to 40 percent. 
■ Reduces congestion at freeway interchanges, especially in metropolitan areas. 
■ Creates a sense of fairness when all lanes are moving at the same speed. 
■ Reduces incidents of road rage. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
Chapter 5: Signs, signals and
pavement markings 
Minnesota signs, signals and pavement markings follow national standards. They provide clear 
instructions to help you drive safely. Learn to recognize and understand traffic signs, signals and 
pavement markings. 
Signs 
Road signs use uniform symbols and pictures, along with written instructions. The shapes and colors of 
signs are coded to give you a general idea of what the sign means, even before you can read it up close. 
Sign color meanings 
Regulatory 
Red: Prohibits and commands 
White: Regulates 
Warning 
Yellow: Warns 
Yellow-green: Warns and controls in pedestrian and bicycle crossings and school areas 
Orange: Warns and controls in construction zones 
Informational 
Green: Guides and informs 
Blue: Describes services for motorists 
Brown: Indicates historic, cultural or recreational sites 
Common shapes 
Octagon 
Triangle 
Diamond 
Pentagon 
Crossbuck 
Circle 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
55 
Rectangle 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
56 
 
 
Regulatory signs 
Regulatory signs direct drivers to follow certain traffic laws. You must obey these signs to drive safely 
and lawfully. If you do not obey these signs, you may receive a traffic citation and a fine. 
Stop 
Come to a complete stop. Remain stopped until pedestrians and vehicles with 
the right of way have cleared the intersection. Then proceed with caution. 
A red circle with a red slash mark across a symbol indicates that you should not take a certain course of action. 
Yield 
Slow down or stop if necessary. Give the right of way to all other vehicles 
and pedestrians. Wait until it is safe to proceed. 
Do Not Enter 
Do not enter that lane or road if this sign is facing you. 
Wrong Way 
You have entered a lane of oncoming traffic. You are traveling in the 
wrong direction. 
Do Not Pass 
Marks the beginning of a no-passing zone. 
No Left Turn 
Speed Limit 
Speed limit signs indicate the maximum speed you may drive on a road. 
You may also see minimum speed limits on interstate freeways with controlled 
access. Do not drive slower than the minimum posted limit unless bad weather 
or poor road conditions make it necessary. 
No U Turn 
No Parking 
No Right Turn 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
57 
 
One Way 
Traffic in the specified lane flows only in the direction of the arrow. 
No Turn on Red 
Wait for the traffic signal to turn green before you turn. 
Keep Right 
Stay to the right of a traffic island, median or obstruction ahead. 
Roundabout 
When approaching a multilane roundabout, get into the appropriate lane 
well in advance. The signs will show you which lanes to use for different 
turns. For example, to turn right, get into the right lane only. To turn left, 
get into the left lane only. The sign shows that you can go straight from 
either lane. 
Lane-Use Control Signs 
You must turn if you are in the specified lane. 
Traffic in the right lane may proceed straight ahead or turn. 
Center Lane Left-turn Only 
You must share the center lane and use it only for making left turns when 
traveling in either direction. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
58 
 
 
 
Lane for Limited Uses 
The diamond symbol indicates that the traffic lane is reserved for specific use 
or certain types of vehicles. The lane may be designated for cars with two or 
more passengers, buses, commercial vehicles or bicycles. 
Reduced Speed Ahead 
A slower speed limit is posted ahead. Begin slowing down. 
An “exempt” sign means that bus and truck drivers, who are usually required 
to stop at railroad crossings, may proceed without stopping. However, drivers 
still need to look in both directions for trains. 
Warning signs 
Warning signs alert you to possible hazards ahead. For your safety and the safety of others, you must 
recognize and react to them. 
Some common warning signs are shown below. 
■ Most warning signs are yellow. 
■ Pedestrian or bicycle crossing signs and school zone signs may be yellow or fluorescent yellow-green. 
Railroad Crossings 
Warning signs, pavement markings, gates and flashing red lights are positioned 
at most railroad crossings. Pavement markings include a stop line, an “X” and 
the letters “RR” painted on the pavement in front of the crossing. 
An X-shaped sign identifies a railroad crossing. If there is more than one track, 
a sign below the crossbuck indicates the number of tracks. 
Handicapped Parking 
Parking spaces with blue handicapped parking signs are reserved for vehicles 
with disability license plates or a disability parking permit. If designated 
disability parking spaces are occupied or unavailable, you may park at an 
angle and occupy two standard parking spaces if you have a valid disability 
parking permit or license plates. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Railroad Crossings Ahead 
These signs alert you that a railroad crossing is ahead. Slow down and look 
carefully in both directions and be prepared to stop. Remember, trains 
cannot stop quickly. 
School Zone 
These yellow or fluorescent yellow-green, pentagon-shaped warning signs 
indicate that a school or an approved school crosswalk is ahead. Watch for 
children and be prepared to stop. 
School Crossing 
Watch for children in crosswalk and be prepared to stop. Drivers must 
yield to all pedestrians in crosswalks. The school crossing sign with the 
arrow below is the standard marking. 
Pedestrian Crossing 
These signs direct drivers to watch for pedestrians crossing the road. 
Slow down and be prepared to stop for pedestrians. Yield the right of way 
to pedestrians crossing at intersections and crosswalks. The pedestrian 
crossing sign with the arrow below is the standard marking. 
No Passing Zone 
This sign is on the left side of a two-way highway. It warns of the beginning of 
a no passing zone. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
60 
 
 
 
Slow-Moving Vehicle Emblem 
This emblem must be displayed on all vehicles that travel at speeds of 30 mph 
or less, such as farm implements or animal-drawn vehicles, when they are 
making use of a public road. Adjust your vehicle speed or prepare to change 
lanes when you see this sign. 
T-Intersection Ahead 
The road you are traveling on will end soon. Prepare to turn right or left. 
Yield to cross traffic. 
Intersection warning signs 
Animal-Drawn Vehicle 
Be alert for slow-moving, animal-drawn vehicles on the roadway. Reduce 
your speed and pass slowly. Animal-drawn vehicles are required to have 
a light or lamp visible within 500 feet from sunset to sunrise, or during periods 
of reduced visibility, inclement weather or insufficient light. 
Crossroad 
An intersection is ahead. Prepare to yield. 
Side Road 
Traffic is coming from your right. Watch for vehicles entering the roadway. 
Y-Intersection Ahead 
The road ahead splits into two different directions. Be prepared for traffic 
crossing in your path and prepare to turn in one direction or the other. 
Curve 
The road curves in the direction indicated. If the sign displays a speed limit, 
slow to the indicated speed. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
61 
 
Roundabout 
As you approach a roundabout slow down to the advisory speed and prepare 
to stop if necessary. 
Traffic Signal Ahead 
There is a traffic light at the next intersection. 
Winding Road Ahead 
The road ahead winds back and forth. Slow to a safe or indicated speed. 
Two-way Traffic Ahead 
You are leaving a one-way road and entering a two-way road. Stay to the right. 
Divided Highway Begins 
The road is dividing. Stay to the right. 
Divided Highway Ends 
The divided road ends ahead. Two-way traffic will no longer be divided 
by a center island. 
Road Turns Ahead 
The road ahead sharply changes direction. Slow to a safe speed. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
62 
Crossing Signs 
Crossing signs warn you to watch for animals, humans and vehicles crossing 
the road. 
Lane Ends 
Two lanes will become one. In this example, vehicles in the right lane must 
merge into left-lane traffic. Right-lane vehicles must yield. 
Merging Traffic 
Vehicles merge onto the roadway on which you are traveling. Be prepared 
to allow vehicles to enter. 
Slippery Road 
The road surface is slippery when it is wet. This sign is often located near 
bridges and overpasses. 
Steep Hill 
The road ahead declines steeply. Make sure your vehicle’s brakes are in 
working order before you proceed. 
Added Lane 
The roadway will gain an additional lane of traffic. New traffic will not 
have to merge. 
Low Clearance Ahead 
Do not proceed if your vehicle is taller than the height indicated on the 
sign, or your vehicle may become stuck. 
Narrow Bridge 
The bridge ahead is narrower than the roadway. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
63 
 
Construction signs 
Orange signs with black letters are used in construction and work zones. Slow down when you see an 
orange sign. These signs warn drivers of restricted lanes of traffic, detours and other road work hazards. 
Historic, cultural and recreational signs 
Brown signs point out historic sites, parks and other points of interest. 
Indicates that a person with a flag is ahead. Drive cautiously. 
Indicates that workers are performing maintenance on the roadway. 
Slow down and adjust your lane position to stay away from workers. 
Reduced speeds are often posted in work zones. Motorists who violate 
the posted speed limit in work zones when workers are present will be 
assessed a $300 fine. 
Drums, cones, tubes, flashing arrows, and orange- and white-striped 
barriers are all used to keep traffic out of a construction area or areas 
where it is dangerous to drive. You may also see people holding orange 
signs, flags or stop signs, giving directions in work zones. Always follow 
their directions. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motorist services signs 
Blue signs direct you to services such as telephones, gas, food, motels, hospitals and rest areas. 
Traffic-control signals 
Traffic-control signals are used at intersections with high traffic volume. They promote safety and orderly 
traffic flow. If a traffic signal is not functioning, treat the intersection like an uncontrolled intersection. 
Intersection gridlock 
You should not enter an intersection controlled by a traffic signal unless you can move through the inter-
section immediately, continuously and completely without blocking cross traffic. 
This does not apply if you are: 
■ Directed by a traffic-control agent or a peace officer. 
■ Moving to allow the passing of an authorized emergency vehicle with its lights activated. 
■ Making a turn that allows the vehicle to safely leave the intersection. 
Guidance and information signs 
Green signs indicate exits, distance to cities, interstate interchanges, street or route names and 
bicycle routes. 
Route signs 
Route signs indicate different types of roadways. 
Interstate 
Freeway 
U.S. 
Highway 
Minnesota 
Highway 
County Road 
County Road 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A steady red light means “stop.” 
Stop and wait for the light to change. Come to a complete stop at the stop line, 
before the crosswalk or before entering the intersection. 
Right turn on red: After stopping, you may make a right turn when the 
intersection is clear, if traffic is permitted to travel in that direction. If a 
“No Turn on Red” sign is posted, you must wait for the light to turn green. 
Left turn on red: If certain conditions are met, you may make a left turn 
from a one-way road onto a one way cross street while the traffic light is red. 
Before turning, you must: 
■ Come to a complete stop. 
■ Make sure the intersection is clear. 
■ Yield to any pedestrians or other vehicles. 
■ Ensure traffic is permitted to travel only in the direction you are turning. 
A red arrow means “stop.” 
You must come to a complete stop at the stop line, before the crosswalk 
or before entering the intersection. When the arrow turns green, you may 
proceed in the direction it indicates. 
Treat a flashing red light as a stop sign. Come to a complete stop, yield to 
vehicles and pedestrians who reach the intersection before you, and proceed 
when the intersection is clear. 
A steady yellow light or arrow means “caution.” The signal is about 
to turn red. 
Do not enter the intersection if you can stop safely before doing so. If you 
cannot stop safely, proceed through the intersection with caution. If you are 
waiting in the intersection to make a turn and the signal turns from yellow 
to red, complete the turn as soon as it is safe. Do not back up. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A flashing yellow light or arrow means “caution.” 
Proceed through the intersection with caution. Yield the right of way to 
vehicles and pedestrians already in the intersection. If you are turning left or 
making a U-turn, you must yield to oncoming vehicles that are close enough 
to be an immediate hazard. 
A green arrow means you can safely turn in the direction of the arrow. 
Your turn should be protected from oncoming or crossing traffic. 
A green light. 
You may cross the intersection as soon as it is clear. Yield to any vehicles or 
pedestrians in the intersection. When turning left, yield to oncoming traffic. 
When turning right or left, yield to pedestrians crossing in front of your vehicle. 
Pedestrian signals 
There are stop and go signals for pedestrians. Pedestrians must obey 
these signals. 
■ “Walk” signal: When the pedestrian or “Walk” signal is visible, pedestrians 
should look to see if it is safe to cross before proceeding. Once in the 
intersection, pedestrians may continue walking to the other side of 
the road. 
■ Flashing “Don’t Walk” signal: When the raised hand or “Don’t Walk” signal 
is flashing, pedestrians should not begin to cross. Pedestrians already in the 
intersection may continue walking to the other side at a normal pace. 
■ Steady “Don’t Walk” signal: When a steady raised hand or “Don’t Walk” 
signal is visible, pedestrians should not attempt to cross. Pedestrians 
already in the intersection should walk to the nearest safe location as 
quickly and safely as possible. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
67 
 
 
 
 
Lane use control signals 
These signals allow lanes to be used by traffic from different directions at different times. You must also 
follow all other traffic signs and signals that apply. 
Freeway ramp meters 
Ramp meters are signal lights on freeway entrance ramps that help control the flow of merging traffic. 
Like traffic signals at intersections, red, yellow and green lights indicate when drivers can proceed. 
Only one car may proceed each time the light is green. 
A steady yellow X means you should prepare to move safely into another lane. A 
lane-control change is being made in the lane below the steady yellow X. A steady 
red X will be displayed next, and you cannot occupy the lane at that time. 
A flashing yellow X means you can use the lane below the flashing yellow X to 
make a left turn. You must use caution because left-turning vehicles from the 
other direction may be using the same lane. 
A steady downward yellow arrow means you should prepare to move safely 
into another lane. The freeway lane below the steady downward yellow arrow 
will be closed. 
A flashing downward yellow arrow means you can use the freeway lane under 
the flashing downward yellow arrow. Exercise caution in this lane. 
A steady downward green arrow means you are allowed to drive in the lane 
below the green arrow. 
A steady red X means you cannot drive in the lane. 
One car per green light 
When the ramps are metered, you must take turns entering the highway 
at the light each time the light turns green. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pavement markings 
Pavement markings direct and regulate traffic. 
White lines 
White lines separate lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. 
■ White dashes: You can change lanes where this marking is present. 
■ Shorter and thicker white dashes: The lane is ending. 
■ Solid white line: You should not change lanes. Solid white lines also mark crosswalks, stop lines 
at intersections, parking stalls and the edges of a roadway. 
■ Double solid white lines: You must not change lanes. 
■ Solid white line with bicycle insignia: This area is for bicycle or electric-assist bicycle traffic only. 
If you are on a bicycle, you must travel in the same direction as adjacent traffic. 
Yellow lines 
Yellow lines separate traffic moving in opposite directions. 
■ Solid yellow line: You must not pass. Passing in a no-passing zone is illegal. 
■ Yellow dashes: You may pass. 
■ Mixed lines (solid and dashes): A solid yellow line may appear on one side of the roadway while 
a line of dashes appears on the other side. You must obey the marking in your lane of traffic. 
■ Double solid yellow lines: You must not pass, regardless of which side of the line you are driving. 
Lane markings 
Road markings can be used to separate lanes reserved for certain actions or types of vehicles. 
Two-lane road with traffic moving in both directions. Traffic is separated by 
a line of yellow dashes, which means you may pass from either lane. 
Two-lane road with traffic moving in both directions. Do not pass in the lane 
with the solid yellow line. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
69 
Two-lane road with traffic moving in both directions. You must not pass, regardless 
of which direction you are driving. 
Road with four lanes, two in each direction separated by two solid yellow lines. 
Do not cross solid yellow lines to pass. 
Multilane road with traffic moving in both directions separated by a solid traffic 
divider. No shoulders at inner edges of roadway. 

Chapter 5: Signs, signals and pavement markings
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn lanes 
Turn lanes near intersections separate left-turning or right-turning traffic from through traffic. White 
arrows, sometimes accompanied by the word “only,” indicate that drivers must stay within a designated 
lane while turning onto the cross street. If your vehicle is in this type of lane, you must turn. Some turn 
lanes have multiple arrows, allowing you to turn left or right, or to go straight. To discourage drivers 
from changing lanes near an intersection, turn lanes are separated from through traffic lanes by solid 
white lines. 
Center turn lanes 
A center lane between lanes of traffic traveling in opposite directions may be designated for left turns 
only. This type of lane is marked by parallel solid and dashed yellow lines. These lines are sometimes 
accompanied by white arrows on the pavement. Vehicles traveling in either direction can use these 
lanes to make left turns onto another roadway or a driveway. 
Road with three lanes with traffic moving in both directions. Center turn lane is 
reserved for traffic turning left from both directions. 
Reversible lanes 
Reversible lanes help keep traffic flowing during rush-hour periods. They are separated by dashed double 
yellow lines. You may cross these lines only if the overhead signal above the lane you wish to enter has 
a green arrow, or if a sign permits you to do so. 
Carpool lanes 
Carpool lanes are restricted to vehicles with two or more occupants. They are marked by a diamond 
symbol or with “Carpool Only” signs. They are usually located on the far-left side of a freeway and are 
separated from other traffic lanes by combinations of white or yellow lines. 
Warning markings 
Pavement messages may be used to warn you of certain conditions, such as “School Zone Ahead.” 
Traffic officers 
Law enforcement officers and other individuals direct traffic on some occasions. When an officer is 
present, obey any hand signals you are given rather than traffic signals, signs or pavement markings. 
Most traffic officers signal drivers to stop by holding up one hand with the palm facing the vehicle and 
giving a long blast on the whistle. Officers signal drivers to start or keep moving by motioning with the 
hand and giving a series of short blasts on the whistle. Officers may signal with a flashlight during 
low-light conditions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6: Driving conditions 
This chapter provides guidance on how you can drive safely in a variety of conditions. 
Using the Scan, Identify, Predict, Decide and Execute (SIPDE) System 
Nothing you do will guarantee that others will see you. The only eyes you can really count on are your 
own. Experienced drivers practice being aware of what is happening around them. They create their 
driving strategy using a system known as SIPDE. 
SIPDE is a five-step process used to make appropriate judgments and apply them correctly in different 
traffic situations. 
■ Scan 
■ Identify 
■ Predict 
■ Decide 
■ Execute 
Let’s examine each of these steps. 
Scan 
Search aggressively ahead, to the sides and behind to avoid potential hazards before they arise. How 
assertively you search, and how much time and space you have, can eliminate or reduce the impact 
of a crash. Focus on finding potential escape routes around intersections, shopping areas, schools and 
commercial zones. Search for: 
■ Oncoming traffic that may turn in front of you. 
■ Traffic coming from the left and right, including bicycles and pedestrians. 
■ Traffic approaching from behind. 
■ Hazardous road conditions. 
Identify 
Locate hazards and potential conflicts. 
■ Moving vehicles and pedestrians: Cars, motorcycles, bicycles, pedestrians or other vehicles may 
move into your path and increase the likelihood of a crash. 
■ Unpredictable children and animals: Unattended children and animals can make short, fast moves. 
■ Stationary objects: Potholes, guard rails, bridges, roadway signs, hedges or trees won’t move into your 
path but may influence your driving strategy. 
Predict 
Consider the speed, distance and direction of hazards to anticipate how they may affect you. 
Cars moving into your path are more critical than those moving away or sitting still. 
Decide 
Based on your prediction, decide what you would need to do if the situation changed quickly. 
You must constantly make decisions to cope with changing traffic situations. 
Execute 
Carry out your decision. To create space and minimize harm: 
■ Communicate your presence with your lights, horn or both. 
■ Adjust your speed appropriately. 
■ Adjust your position, direction or both. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
71 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Three-Second Rule 
Applying the “Three-Second Rule” helps you keep a safe distance between your car and the vehicle ahead 
of you. This rule is for standard-length vehicles driving in ideal conditions. 
1. Choose a fixed reference point at the side of the road ahead, such as a telephone pole, signpost, 
tree or bridge. 
2. When the vehicle ahead of you passes the reference point, begin counting: “One-thousand-one, 
one-thousand-two, one-thousand-three.” 
3. If you pass the reference point before you finish counting, you are following too closely. 
4. Gradually slow down until you reach a safe following distance and speed. 
When road conditions are poor, or if you are driving a vehicle longer than the standard length, increase 
your following distance to a four- or five-second count. 
If the vehicle behind you is following too closely, slow down slightly and allow it to pass. 
Stopping distance 
The distance you need to stop your vehicle can help determine a safe following distance. However, your 
actual stopping distance depends on many factors, including: 
■ The time it takes to see and recognize danger ahead. 
■ The length of time from perceiving the danger to using the brakes, which is about 3/4 of a second. 
■ Weather conditions. 
■ The condition of your tire treads. 
■ The type and condition of your brakes. 
Night driving 
Although there is usually less traffic at night, nearly half of all fatal traffic crashes in Minnesota occur 
after dark. To help ensure you reach your destination safely: 
■ Study road maps and directions before starting out. 
■ Make sure your vehicle lights are working. 
■ Ensure your windshield is clean and free of defects. 
Headlights 
When you are within 1,000 feet of an oncoming vehicle or following another vehicle at a distance of 
200 feet or less, your headlights must remain on low beam. 
Your headlights must be turned on at sunset and used until sunrise. Use them during weather conditions 
that include rain, snow, hail, sleet or fog, and any time you cannot clearly see the road ahead for at least 
500 feet. You should be able to stop within the distance your headlights illuminate the road. For most 
vehicles, this distance is no more than 350 feet on high beam. 
When driving in the dark, you may encounter glare from oncoming headlights or from the reflection of 
headlights in your rearview mirror. If you are blinded by the glare, use the white line along the edge of 
the road as a reference. 
For glare caused by headlights from behind you, use a “day-night” mirror or adjust your regular mirror. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Accelerate 
3. Signal and move carefully 
into traffic lane 
2. Select a gap in traffic. 
Adjust speed 
Freeway driving 
Freeways are multi-lane, divided highways with limited access from other roads. They allow you to travel 
long distances without stopping because there are no stops or cross traffic. 
Entering the freeway 
Entry ramps are short, one-way roads that provide access to freeways. At the end of most entry ramps, 
there is an acceleration lane that allows you to increase your speed to safely merge with traffic already 
on the freeway. 
To avoid disrupting traffic flow or cutting off other drivers when you merge, adjust your speed to match 
the vehicles already on the freeway. You must yield to other vehicles when merging. Use your turn signal 
to let other drivers know your intention. Watch for an opening in the nearest traffic lane and merge into 
the flow of traffic when you can do so safely. 
Do not stop on the ramp or in the acceleration lane unless it is absolutely necessary. 
When an acceleration lane is not available and a “Yield” sign is posted on the entry ramp, obey the sign. 
Stop if necessary. Do not force your way into the lane of traffic. 
Freeway ramp meters 
Ramp meters are used on many freeway entry ramps in metropolitan areas to reduce traffic jams and 
crashes, and to make merging onto the freeway easier. 
The meters are traffic signals placed about halfway down the entry ramp and are usually activated during 
peak travel hours. Red, yellow and green lights indicate when you can proceed. It is illegal to go through 
the red light. Only one car may proceed each time the light is green. 
Freeway speed and lane use 
Maintain the same approximate speed as surrounding vehicles when possible but never exceed the 
posted speed limits. If you are driving slower than other traffic, stay in the lane nearest to the right side 
of the road. If you need to change lanes to pass other vehicles or to leave the freeway, signal your intent 
and make sure your path is clear before moving over. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
74 
 
 
 
Use of freeway or expressway shoulders by buses 
Transit buses and metro mobility buses are permitted to use the shoulder of a freeway or expressway. 
Buses can use the shoulder only when main-line traffic speeds are less than 35 miles per hour. Bus drivers 
on the shoulder may not exceed the speed of main-line traffic by more than 15 miles per hour and may 
never exceed 35 miles per hour. Bus drivers on the shoulder must yield to merging, entering and exiting 
traffic and to other vehicles on the shoulder. 
Message signs 
Message and lane-use signs on some freeways warn drivers of traffic crashes, stalled vehicles or other 
traffic conditions ahead. 
Message signs may also be activated when the state issues an AMBER Alert in response to a child 
abduction. The signs will provide information such as a vehicle description. Drivers who see a vehicle 
fitting the description, or who have other information about the missing child, will be asked to notify 
law enforcement. 
High-occupancy vehicle lanes 
These lanes are for use only by motorcycles, buses and vehicles carrying two or more people. 
Freeway interchange 
An interchange connects a freeway to a road or another freeway by a series of ramps. These connecting 
roadways allow you to leave one road and enter another safely, without disrupting the flow of traffic. 
Cloverleaf 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
75 
Folded diamond 
Diamond 
Diverging diamond 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diverging diamond interchange 
A diverging diamond interchange is designed so that traffic lanes cross over at each end of the bridge, 
eliminating left-hand turns across opposing traffic. Instead of making a sharp left turn, you veer to the 
left for access. These interchanges improve traffic safety and mobility, and reduce overall traffic delays 
by up to 60 percent. 
Safety benefits of diverging diamond interchanges include: 
■ There are fewer conflict points. 
■ Conflict points are spread out throughout the interchange. 
■ Drivers have a longer sight distance at turns. 
■ Wrong way entry to ramps is extremely difficult. 
■ Pedestrian crossings are shorter. 
Navigating a diverging diamond interchange 
Traffic crisscrosses at either end of the bridge. Instead of making hard left turns, you veer to the left 
for access. Pedestrians cross to the middle of the bridge and walk between traffic lanes with protective 
barriers on either side. 
Stopping, parking and backing up 
It is illegal to stop or park a vehicle on an interstate freeway, except in an emergency. Running out of 
fuel is not considered an emergency, and you could receive a citation. 
If you must stop on the freeway because of an emergency, take the following actions: 
■ Park your vehicle on the shoulder, as far from the main roadway as possible. 
■ Open the trunk and raise the hood or tie a white cloth to the radio antenna or a door handle. 
■ Use hazard warning lights if you have them. 
■ If you have flares or reflectors, place them from 100 to 500 feet behind your vehicle on the right 
edge of the main road. 
■ Stay with your vehicle, if possible. If you must leave your vehicle, do not walk on the area of the 
highway reserved for vehicle traffic. This is illegal and extremely dangerous. 
It is illegal to back up or turn around on a freeway. An exception to this law applies to drivers of  
emergency and road repair vehicles. Drivers of these vehicles may back up or turn around as necessary  
to perform their duties. 
Emergency vehicles on the freeway 
When you see the flashing lights of an ambulance, fire truck or police car on the shoulder of the road, 
you must move a lane away from the emergency vehicle if it is possible to do so safely. If you cannot 
safely move a lane away, slow down. 
When you see an emergency vehicle with its lights and siren activated behind you, move to the nearest 
side of the road and stop. Do not slam on the brakes or swerve into other lanes. Remember to use your 
turn signal. Remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has completely passed. Look for other emer-
gency vehicles that may be following it before pulling out. 
Stay at least 500 feet back from any firefighting vehicle. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Getting off the freeway 
It is helpful to know where you need to exit the freeway before you begin driving. Watch for signs that 
provide information about upcoming exits. As you near your desired exit, signal your intent to change 
lanes and move into the deceleration lane when you can do so safely. This gives you time to slow down 
before reaching the exit ramp and helps you avoid obstructing faster-moving traffic. 
If you miss your exit, proceed to the next one. Do not back up or make a U-turn to return to the 
desired exit. 
Crashes 
If you are involved in a crash that results in injury, stay where you are. If you are able, call 911 or the 
nearest law enforcement agency for help. 
If the crash results only in property damage, move to a safe location. Do not step out of your vehicle 
until you have moved to a safe location, away from traffic. 
Exchange driver’s license and insurance information with the other driver or drivers. Write down the 
license plate numbers of other vehicles involved. You may also wish to exchange vehicle identification 
numbers. Call for law enforcement assistance if necessary. 
Distracted driving 
Driver distraction or inattention is a leading factor in crashes in Minnesota, accounting for at least 25 
percent of all crashes annually. Distracted drivers fail to recognize potential hazards on the road and react 
more slowly to traffic conditions, decreasing their margin of safety. 
Types of driver distraction: 
■ Visual: Looking away from the road. 
■ Mechanical/physical: Taking hands off the wheel. 
■ Cognitive: Being “lost in thought.” 
Distractions inside the vehicle 
Distractions inside the vehicle can include activities such as: using a cell phone, using a GPS, reaching 
for items, eating and drinking, adjusting the radio, talking to other passengers, and reading maps and 
other materials. Even when you are watching the road, behaviors such as looking at a crash scene or 
daydreaming can divert attention from your driving responsibilities. For safety, give the task of driving 
your full attention at all times. 
Illegal driver behaviors in Minnesota 
Certain driver behaviors are illegal on Minnesota roads. These include using a cell phone or wireless 
computer device for text messaging, emailing or accessing the internet while driving, including while 
stopped in traffic. Drivers under age 18 with an instruction permit or provisional license are prohibited 
from using a cell phone, whether handheld or hands-free, except to call 911 in an emergency. It is also 
illegal to wear headphones or earphones in both ears simultaneously to listen to a radio or other 
sound-producing device. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggressive driving 
People who drive aggressively tend to have a low level of concern for other motorists. They exhibit anger 
and frustration while driving, not necessarily because of other drivers’ actions, but because of their  
personal mindset. Aggressive driving usually involves driving faster than surrounding vehicles, leading to 
behaviors such as following too closely, changing lanes frequently and abruptly, often without signaling, 
passing other vehicles on the shoulder, and glaring at or threatening other motorists. 
If you recognize your own behavior in this description, make a greater effort to stay calm when driving.  
It is important to share the road. Safe driving requires courtesy and cooperation from all drivers. If you  
are confronted by an aggressive driver, do not challenge them. Stay out of their way, avoid eye contact  
and do not allow the situation to escalate. 
Obstructed view 
It is illegal to drive a vehicle packed with a load or occupied by more than three people in the front seat. 
The items or people will obstruct your view to the front or sides of the vehicle or interfere with your ability 
to control the vehicle. 
Carrying a projecting load 
A load must not stick out more than three feet in front of the front wheels or bumper of any motor vehicle. 
If a load extends four feet or more from the rear of any vehicle, a red, yellow or orange flag at least 
16 inches square must be attached to the end of the load. At night, a red lantern or lamp, visible from a 
distance of at least 500 feet, must be attached to the end of the load. 
Passenger vehicles may not carry loads that extend beyond the line of the fenders on the left side and 
more than six inches beyond the fender line on the right side. 
Campers and trailers 
If you pull a camper or trailer with your vehicle, you must maintain at least 500 feet of following distance 
from other vehicles. 
When loaded, 10 to 15 percent of the trailer’s weight should be balanced on the hitch between the trailer 
and vehicle. When correctly loaded, the trailer’s floor should be level. After the first few miles, stop and 
check the hitch, tires, lights and load. Repeat this process at all rest stops. 
Travel at a slower speed. Many trailers have smaller wheels that turn faster than your car wheels, causing 
heat buildup that can lead to trailer wheel bearing failure. 
Remember that the brakes on your vehicle were probably not designed to handle heavy trailer loads. 
A sudden stop at high speed could flip both the trailer and the car. 
Speed up carefully, using a lower gear if necessary. Maintain enough following distance to prevent the  
need for sudden stops. When passing other vehicles, remember the additional length of your trailer  
and be aware that your ability to accelerate is reduced. 
Wind and rain will affect your ability to handle and control a vehicle pulling extra weight. When towing a 
trailer or camper in wet or windy conditions, slow down more than you would normally do in such weather. 
Allow plenty of room for turns. Long trailers will swing closer to the edge of the road than your vehicle. 
Pay extra attention to your vehicle’s cooling system when towing extra weight. Your engine will overheat 
more easily in warm weather, at high speeds and in hilly areas. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trailer requirements 
Maximum length — 45 feet 
Maximum width — 8 feet 6 inches  
Maximum height — 13 feet 6 inches 
Tail lamps — two red 
Reflectors — two red 
Rear license plate lamp — one white 
Trailer stop and turn signals must be used for night driving and whenever stop and turn signals on the 
towing vehicle are not visible to other drivers. 
The 102-inch width limit (8 feet, 6 inches) for recreational vehicles does not include attachments that 
do not extend beyond the vehicle’s exterior rearview mirrors if the recreational vehicle is self-propelled. 
The width of a trailer may not extend beyond the exterior rearview mirrors of the towing vehicle. 
Type A, B or C motor homes may not be longer than 45 feet. The general length limit for single-unit 
vehicles is 40 feet. 
All trailers with a gross vehicle weight of 3,000 pounds or more must be equipped with brakes. 
All recreational trailers must have a clearly visible plate with current registration. 
A safety chain must be permanently attached to the trailer and fastened to the vehicle used for towing. 
Recreational vehicle combinations 
A recreational vehicle combination consists of a pickup truck or recreational truck-tractor attached to a 
camper trailer, which can also have a trailer hitched to it. The trailer can carry watercraft, motorcycles, 
mopeds, off-highway motorcycles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, motorized golf carts or equestrian 
equipment or supplies. 
You must be at least 18 years old to drive a recreational vehicle combination. The towing rating of the 
pickup or recreational truck-tractor must be equal to or greater than the total weight of all vehicles 
being towed. 
A recreational vehicle combination may not be more than 70 feet in length. It may not be driven in 
the Twin Cities Metro Area from Monday through Friday during the hours of 6 to 9 a.m. and 4 to 7 p.m. 
Winter driving vehicle safety 
Remove snow and ice from your vehicle’s hood, windows and lights before driving. 
■ Make sure your windshield wiper fluid contains antifreeze. 
■ Get the feel of the road. Try your brakes while driving slowly to test the road surface. 
■ Adjust your speed to road conditions. 
■ Avoid using cruise control on slippery roads. 
If your vehicle becomes stuck on ice or snow, try to free it by “rocking” it back and forth. Keep the front 
wheels straight and slowly drive forward, then backward, as far as possible, without spinning the tires. 
Accelerate gently when the tires grip. If your vehicle starts to slide or your tires start to spin, apply the 
brake, and repeat this operation in the opposite direction. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Snow emergencies and parking rules 
When a significant amount of snow accumulates, city officials may declare a snow emergency. Certain 
parking rules may go into effect while snow is removed from streets. 
Obey snow emergency parking rules to avoid towing and fines. 
Sharing the road with snowplows 
When roads are covered with snow or ice, watch for the flashing white, yellow and blue lights of snowplows. 
Never crowd a snowplow. Pass snowplows only when you can see the entire vehicle. Stay well behind 
plows to avoid flying sanding materials, snow and ice that could hit your vehicle. Be alert for dangerous 
snow clouds or “whiteout” conditions. Snowplows can create clouds of blowing snow that may conceal 
the road and hide driving hazards. 
Snowplows and other removal equipment often move at slow speeds. In residential areas, they may 
back up to turn around. Give equipment operators room to do their job safely. 
Winter survival 
Keep a survival kit in your vehicle 
For safety, it is important to keep a winter survival kit in any vehicle you drive. Some recommended 
items include: 
■ Shovel 
■ Container of sand or salt 
■ Warm clothing and footwear 
■ Red flag for your vehicle’s antenna 
■ Blanket or sleeping bag 
■ Quick energy foods, drinking water and an empty waste container 
■ Tow chain and tire chains 
■ Road flares or reflectors 
■ Jumper cables 
■ Candles and matches or a lighter 
■ First aid kit 
What to do if you become stranded 
If you become stranded while traveling in cold weather, stay with your vehicle. Most deaths in these 
situations occur when people leave their vehicles, become lost and suffer prolonged exposure to 
the cold. 
Stay calm, wait for help to arrive and take as many of the following steps as possible: 
■ Turn on your hazard warning lights. 
■ Attach a red flag to your radio antenna or door handle. 
■ Set out flags and flares, if possible. 
■ If clothing, blankets and other survival supplies are stored in the trunk, bring them inside the vehicle. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■ Keep the exhaust pipe clear of snow and debris. 
■ Run the engine and heater until the vehicle is reasonably warm, then turn it off. Repeat this process 
as long as fuel is available or until you are rescued. Running the engine for about 10 minutes each 
hour to charge the battery and warm the interior is recommended. 
■ Even in extremely cold weather, leave at least one window partially open to let in fresh air. Occupants 
of an idling vehicle can suffer carbon monoxide poisoning if ventilation is not adequate. 
■ At least one person in the vehicle should remain awake at all times. 
Maintaining alertness and concentration 
Becoming tired or sleepy while driving is common but very dangerous. To prevent this, make sure to get 
plenty of rest before starting a long drive. 
Here are some suggestions to help you stay alert, but, remember, these will not have a lasting effect: 
■ Stop as often as you need to — at least once every 100 miles or every two hours. Get out of the car 
to walk, stretch, loosen up and relax. Have something to eat or drink. 
■ If you have passengers, talk to stay alert. Ask someone else to drive when you begin to feel tired. 
■ If you are alone, listen to the radio or sing aloud. 
■ When the weather permits, open a window slightly to increase fresh airflow. Do not rely on 
“stay awake” drugs. 
■ If none of this works, stop for the day or park far from the road and rest. If you stay in the car, 
lock all doors and open windows slightly to let in fresh air. 
Skidding 
When driving on a slippery road, slow down and maintain a safe distance from the vehicle in front 
of you. Do not use cruise control when the road surface is slippery. 
Your vehicle skids when tires lose their grip on the road surface. If this happens, stay calm. Do not 
overreact or slam on the brakes. Instead, take your foot off the accelerator and brake until you can 
turn in the desired direction. 
Anti-lock braking 
Some vehicles have an electronic anti-lock braking system (ABS) that helps keep the vehicle under control 
while braking. If you have anti-lock brakes, do not pump them as you would regular brakes. Instead, press 
down on the brake pedal and continue to steer the vehicle until you regain control. If you are not sure 
if your vehicle has anti-lock brakes, read your vehicle’s owner’s manual for specific instructions before 
you drive. 
Driving in heavy rain or fog 
If you encounter thunderstorms or fog, reduce speed, use extra caution and be prepared to stop. Increase 
your following distance. Your headlights must be used when you cannot see more than 500 feet ahead 
and when it is raining, snowing, sleeting or hailing. Keep them on low beam to reduce glare. If you 
cannot see a safe distance ahead, pull off the road and stop until visibility improves. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
82 
 
 
 
 
Hydroplaning 
At speeds of 35 mph or less, most tires will “wipe” water off the road surface to keep tires in contact with 
the road. At higher speeds, water can collect under tires and lift them off the road surface — this is called 
“hydroplaning.” When your tires hydroplane, they lose all contact with the road. If this happens, you will 
be unable to brake, accelerate or change direction. If your tires begin to hydroplane, take your foot off 
the gas pedal. 
Hydroplaning is less likely to occur at normal highway speeds if your vehicle has good tires with deep 
treads, which allow water to escape. However, hydroplaning can occur at any speed if the depth of the 
water on the road is greater than the depth of the tire treads. In heavy rain, standard cars may begin  
to hydroplane at 35 mph. 
To prevent hydroplaning, keep your tires in good condition and reduce speed when driving on wet roads. 
Driving on narrow roads and hills 
When you approach curves on narrow roads, or in areas where brush and trees block your view of the 
road ahead, you can use your horn to warn other drivers or pedestrians that you are on the road. 
Do not coast down steep hills with your transmission in neutral. On steep hills, check your speedometer 
frequently. Vehicle speed will increase even when your foot is not on the accelerator. 
Blowouts 
A “blowout” is a burst tire that can throw your vehicle out of control. Before a blowout occurs, you 
may hear a thumping sound or notice the steering wheel pulling to the right or left. 
If you experience a blowout, hold the steering wheel tightly, steer straight ahead and slowly ease 
your foot off the accelerator. Do not brake until the vehicle is back under your control. Pull the vehicle 
completely off the road at the nearest safe location. 
Steering failure 
If the front wheels of your vehicle do not respond when you turn the steering wheel, ease up on the 
accelerator. Do not brake unless it is necessary to avoid a crash. 
Your vehicle may balance on its own and travel in a straight path as you reduce speed. If you must apply 
the brake, do so gently. If you brake suddenly or try to shift gears, the change in speed may throw the 
vehicle off balance and out of control. 
Brake failure 
A brake pedal that sinks slowly when pressure is applied is a sign that your vehicle’s brakes may be failing. 
A warning light should come on if there is a serious problem. 
If your brake pedal suddenly sinks all the way to the floor, try pumping the pedal to build pressure. If this 
does not work, slowly apply your emergency/parking brake. Applying the brake too abruptly could throw 
the vehicle into a skid. Remember, the emergency/parking brake engages only the rear brakes. 
If road conditions allow you to coast to a stop, shift your car into a lower gear. Continue to downshift 
as you decelerate until you can safely pull over and stop. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Running off the pavement 
If your wheels drift onto the shoulder of the road, do not try to swerve back onto the pavement. Stay on 
the shoulder and slowly release the gas pedal. After you have reduced your speed, turn back onto the 
pavement. Then speed up again. 
Watch out for deer 
There are some things you can do to reduce your risk of hitting a deer. Deer are most active from dusk 
to dawn, so be especially alert during those times. Scan the sides of the road at night to watch for the 
reflection of your vehicle headlights in the eyes of deer. If you see such a reflection on the side of the 
road, slow down. Blow the horn and be ready to stop. Always watch for more than one deer. While deer 
crossings typically occur in rural settings, deer sometimes wander into towns or even cities. Deer may 
cross anywhere, anytime. 
Vehicle approaching in your lane 
If a vehicle is traveling toward you in your lane, move to the right. Do not use the left lane to avoid the 
vehicle. The driver may return to the correct lane and then be in your path. 
If the vehicle continues toward you, steer off the road to the right if necessary to avoid a crash. Sounding 
your horn and flashing your headlights may help a sleepy or distracted driver become alert. 
Vehicle trying to pass you 
If another driver tries to pass you on a two-lane road with traffic moving in both directions and 
misjudges the speed of oncoming traffic or cannot complete the pass, you and the other drivers are 
in danger. You must act to prevent a crash. If the passing vehicle is nearly in position to move back 
into the right lane, slow down and allow the driver to complete the pass as quickly as possible. 
If the passing vehicle must drop back, speed up to make sure there is adequate room for the vehicle 
to move into the lane behind you. If a crash seems likely and the right shoulder is wide enough for 
your vehicle, quickly move to the right and allow the passing vehicle to move into your lane. 
Stalling on railroad tracks 
If your vehicle stalls on railroad tracks and a train is approaching, leave the vehicle immediately. 
To avoid being struck by debris from the collision, keep a safe distance from the tracks. Walk quickly 
at a 45-degree angle away from the tracks in the direction from which the train is approaching. 
Flooded roadways 
Flooding can happen when streams and rivers overflow, dams or levees break, snow melts rapidly, or 
during heavy rainfall. Floodwaters can cover roads, bridges and low areas. Flash floods can come quickly 
and without warning, within minutes or hours of excessive rainfall. 
■ Do not drive through flooded areas. If you see a flooded roadway ahead, turn around and find 
another route. 
■ Be cautious, especially at night when visibility is limited. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■ Remember, 6 inches of water will reach the bottom of most passenger cars, causing loss of control 
or possible stalling. 
■ 2 feet of moving water can carry away most vehicles, including SUVs and pickup trucks. 
■ Even if the water appears shallow, do not attempt to cross a flooded road. Water can hide dips or 
damage roadways by washing away the surface. 
■ If there is no other route, proceed to higher ground and wait for the waters to subside. 
Plunging under water 
Most vehicles will float on the surface of the water for 30 to 60 seconds. If your vehicle enters deep 
water, get out of the vehicle immediately. If possible, exit the vehicle through open windows before the 
water reaches the window level. 
If your vehicle becomes submerged, try not to panic. Vehicle doors cannot be opened until the water 
pressure inside the car is equal to that outside. When the vehicle is completely filled, the doors can be 
opened if there is no structural damage. The weight of the engine will cause the front end of the car 
to sink first. The rear passenger compartment may provide an air pocket while you plan your escape. 
If there are other people in the vehicle, check their condition and try to exit the vehicle together. 
Fire 
If you notice smoke rising from beneath the hood of your vehicle, pull off the road, turn off the ignition 
and exit the vehicle immediately. Do not use water to put out the fire — this will actually spread the blaze. 
Overheating 
Most vehicles have dashboard gauges or lights that indicate the engine temperature. Activities such as 
driving in stop-and-go traffic on a hot day, driving on steep inclines and towing a trailer can cause your 
engine to run hotter than normal. 
When your engine becomes hot, turn off any unnecessary vehicle equipment, such as the air condition-
ing. If the temperature is still too high, turning on the heater will help draw hot air away from the engine. 
If these techniques do not work and the engine temperature suddenly increases or steam rises from the 
engine, pull over to the side of the road, stop the vehicle and turn off the ignition immediately. 
Headlight failure 
If your headlights suddenly go out, try using your parking lights, hazard warning lights or turn signals — 
one of them may work and give you enough light to guide you off the road. If your headlights fail on a  
busy or lighted road, you will probably have enough light to guide you. If all your lights fail on a dark,  
deserted road, slow down and keep your vehicle on the pavement until you can move safely onto  
the shoulder. 
Windshield wiper failure or sudden opening of hood 
If your windshield wipers suddenly fail in heavy rain or snow, slow down and activate your hazard warning 
lights. Do not brake suddenly if other vehicles are behind you. Pull off the road and move to a safe location 
as soon as possible. 

Chapter 6: Driving conditions
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the hood of your vehicle suddenly opens and obstructs your view, you may be able to see through the 
space between the hood and the dashboard. If this is not possible, roll down the window and lean over 
to look past the side of the hood. Activate your hazard warning lights, slow down and steer off the 
road safely. 
Stuck gas pedal 
If your gas pedal sticks, you may be able to free it by hooking your toe under the pedal and raising it. 
If this does not work, apply the brakes and shift into neutral to disengage the engine. Next, choose 
a safe path and steer to the shoulder of the road. If the shoulder is not paved, switch on your hazard 
lights and continue steering the vehicle in a straight path until you can safely pull over to the shoulder 
of the road. 
Vehicle crash with a utility pole or power box 
If your car comes into contact with a utility pole, wire or power box, you should: 
■ Stay in your vehicle and call 911. 
■ Only get out of the vehicle if it is on fire. 
■ If you must get out, jump from the vehicle with both feet together and shuffle your feet on the 
ground as you move away from the scene. 
■ Always assume all wires and equipment are electrified. 
Carbon monoxide poisoning and safety tips 
Carbon monoxide is a deadly, odorless and colorless gas produced by engines. It can collect inside your 
vehicle when the windows are closed or in your garage if your engine is idling. The only cure for carbon 
monoxide poisoning is a good supply of fresh air. 
Early symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning include sudden fatigue, headache, dizziness and nausea. 
If you experience any of these symptoms, open the windows, turn off the ignition, and get out of the 
vehicle or garage as soon as possible. Have the vehicle’s exhaust system inspected if you suspect it 
is leaking. 
Carbon monoxide poisoning occurs most frequently during winter months when vehicle windows tend 
to be closed. When temperatures are cold, carbon monoxide can get trapped inside the garage even 
when the garage door is open completely. Carbon monoxide can seep into an attached house and 
render a person unconscious within a few minutes. 
To reduce the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning and possible death: 
■ Avoid idling a vehicle in a garage. A safer place to warm up a vehicle is in the driveway. 
■ Avoid sitting in a vehicle with the engine idling. 
■ Do not drive with all windows tightly closed. 
■ Avoid idling a vehicle when stuck in the snow or mud. 
■ Make sure your vehicle’s exhaust system does not leak and is not blocked. 
■ Periodically allow fresh air into the vehicle by lowering the windows. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7: Your driving privileges 
Driving in Minnesota is a privilege. You can lose this privilege if you break certain laws or fail to meet 
certain requirements. DVS keeps a record of your driving, which includes information about violations 
in Minnesota and other states. Serious or repeated violations can lead to losing your driving privilege 
or having restrictions on where, when and what types of vehicles you can drive. You can get a copy 
of your driving record at drive.mn.gov. 
License withdrawal 
Your license may be withdrawn by suspension, revocation or cancellation. If this happens, DPS will send 
you a notice of withdrawal and a list of requirements for reinstatement. 
Here are some conditions that could cause you to lose your driving privileges. 
Suspension 
Your driver’s license may be suspended if you: 
■ Repeatedly violate traffic laws. 
■ Are convicted in court for a violation that contributed to a traffic crash resulting in death, personal 
injury or serious property damage. 
■ Use or allow someone else to use your license for an illegal action. It is illegal to let anyone use 
your license or permit. 
■ Commit a traffic offense in another state that would be grounds for suspension in Minnesota. 
■ Are judged in court to be legally unfit to drive a motor vehicle. 
■ Fail to report a medical condition that would result in cancellation of driving privileges. 
■ Fail to stop for a school bus with its stop arm extended and its red lights flashing, within five years 
of a conviction for the same offense. 
■ Are found to possess a fake or altered license. 
■ Make a fraudulent application for a license or identification card. 
■ Take any part of the driver’s license examination for someone else or allow someone else to take 
the examination for you. 
■ Falsely identify yourself to a police officer. 
■ Fail to appear in court or pay a fine on a motor vehicle-related violation when required to do so. 
■ Are convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of Minnesota traffic law. 
■ Fail to pay court-ordered child support. 
■ Use or allow someone else to use your license, permit or ID card to buy tobacco products for someone 
under 18 years of age or alcohol for someone under 21 years of age. 
■ Are under 21 years of age, and the court determines that you drove a motor vehicle while consuming 
or after consuming alcohol. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
86 

Chapter 7: Your driving privileges
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■ Pay a fee to the state or driver’s license agent with a bad check. The suspension will be removed 
when the bad check and any related fees have been paid in full. 
■ Are convicted for theft of gasoline. 
After the period of suspension has ended, your driving privilege may be reinstated if all requirements are 
met. One requirement is payment of the reinstatement fee. If your license expired during the suspension 
period or if your name or address changed, you must apply for a new license and pay the appropriate fee. 
Revocation 
Your driver’s license may be revoked if you: 
■ Refuse to take a test to determine whether you are under the influence of alcohol or a controlled 
substance, or if you fail the test. 
■ Are convicted of manslaughter or any other criminal action while driving a motor vehicle. 
■ Are convicted of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
■ Are convicted of a felony in which you used a motor vehicle. 
■ Are convicted of driving in excess of 100 mph. 
■ Are convicted of fleeing a police officer. 
■ Are convicted of failing to stop, identify yourself and render aid when involved in a motor vehicle 
crash, especially one that involves death or personal injury to others. 
■ Are convicted of lying under oath, signing any legal document that contains false information about 
legal ownership or operation of a motor vehicle, or making a false statement to DPS about that 
information. 
■ Plead guilty or forfeit bail for three violations in a single year of any Minnesota traffic law or ordinance 
that requires a jail sentence upon conviction. 
■ Are convicted of an offense in another state that would be grounds for revoking your license if you 
were convicted in Minnesota. 
■ Are convicted of a misdemeanor for driving a motor vehicle with prior knowledge that the owner 
of the vehicle did not have no-fault vehicle insurance. 
■ Own a vehicle without no-fault insurance and are found to have driven it or allowed others to drive it, 
with full knowledge that the vehicle was not insured. 
■ Are convicted of a gross misdemeanor for failing to stop for a school bus with its stop arm extended 
and its red lights flashing. 
■ Are convicted of selling or possessing a controlled substance while operating a motor vehicle. 
After the period of revocation has ended, your driving privileges may be reinstated if all the reinstatement 
requirements on your withdrawal notice are met. You must show proper identification when you take the 
written test or road test. You must apply for a new license after all your testing requirements are met. 

Chapter 7: Your driving privileges
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limited license 
Under some circumstances, a limited license may be issued to a person whose driving privileges are 
revoked or suspended. Before a limited license is issued, you must meet certain requirements, 
including completing any mandatory waiting periods. 
If you are issued a limited license, you are restricted to: 
■ Traveling to and from your place of employment. 
■ Traveling to and from chemical dependency treatment or counseling. 
■ Providing transportation for dependent children and other dependents living in your household for 
medical, educational or nutritional needs. 
■ Traveling to and from a post-secondary institution where you are enrolled. 
Cancellation 
Your license may be canceled if you do not have a legal right to the driver’s license issued to you. 
Your license may be canceled if you: 
■ Acquire a mental or physical disability that makes you unable to drive safely. 
■ Do not pass a test legally requested by DPS to determine your ability to drive safely. 
■ Give false or misleading information on your license application. Your license will be canceled for 
60 days or until the correct information is provided, whichever is longer. 
■ Commit a crime for which cancellation of your license is a legal punishment. 
■ Do not qualify for a driver’s license under Minnesota law. 
Commercial driver’s license disqualification 
You can lose your commercial driver’s license privileges for committing certain driving offenses. 
See the Minnesota Commercial Driver’s License Manual for information about commercial driver’s 
license requirements. 

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8: Driving under the infuence
of alcohol or drugs 
It is illegal to operate a vehicle on Minnesota roads when impaired by alcohol or other substances. 
Alcohol and driving 
Drinking and driving is a serious problem in Minnesota and across the nation. There is a strong link 
between alcohol use and the severity of traffic crashes. Alcohol is involved in more than one-third of the 
deaths on Minnesota roads each year. Crashes involving impaired drivers kill an average of 240 people 
each year in Minnesota and injure thousands more. The person most often killed in an alcohol-related 
crash is the impaired driver. Young men are more likely than others to engage in this deadly behavior. 
Drugs and driving 
Driving while impaired by drugs is as dangerous as driving while impaired by alcohol. Minnesota law 
prohibits driving while impaired by controlled or intoxicating substances. These substances include illegal 
drugs, prescription drugs, over-the-counter drugs (like cold medicines) and household products. These 
substances can cause drowsiness and impair your ability to operate a vehicle safely and respond to  
driving conditions. 
Legal drugs that may not cause impairment alone can have powerful intoxicating effects when mixed 
with alcohol. The safest rule is to not mix drugs with driving at all. Using drugs can lead to traffic crashes 
resulting in death, injury and property damage. It can also lead to arrest, fines and jail sentences. 
Possession and use of a drug prescribed by a doctor is permitted if the doctor informs the driver that 
it will not affect their ability to drive safely. Pay attention to warning labels on drugs and medicines and 
follow doctor’s orders regarding possible effects. 
Stay away from illegal drugs and don’t use any drug to hide fatigue — the only cure for fatigue is rest. 
Effect of alcohol on driving skills 
Alcohol is a depressant that slows body functions and impairs motor skills. The amount of alcohol in 
the blood is called the “alcohol concentration.” Higher alcohol concentration means a greater degree 
of impairment. Your driving ability becomes impaired after just one drink. 
Types of effects 
Alcohol affects the central nervous system and impairs the ability to drive safely. Here is how specific 
functions are affected by alcohol consumption: 
Judgment 
When you consume alcohol, you misjudge your degree of impairment. You may drive too fast, misjudge 
stopping distances, fail to wear a seat belt and forget to drive defensively. 
Vision 
Alcohol reduces the range of eye movement, decreasing peripheral vision. Blurred vision may also occur 
at high alcohol concentration levels. 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 
89 

Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
90 
 
 
Reaction time 
Alcohol slows reaction time. When you are impaired, you cannot respond quickly to traffic signals, 
actions of other drivers and pedestrians, and events that take place on the road around you. 
Steering 
Impaired drivers tend to over-steer, which can result in weaving and running off the road. 
Perception 
Impaired drivers do not notice or correctly interpret sounds and sights. 
Coordination and balance 
Alcohol impairs the ability to combine steadiness with speed and accuracy. 
Attention 
Alcohol makes it difficult for drivers to focus on the many tasks required to operate a motor vehicle. 
Things to know about alcohol 
A 12-ounce beer, a 5-ounce glass of wine, a typical mixed drink and a 9-ounce wine cooler usually  
contain about the same amount of alcohol. However, it’s important to realize that mixed drinks may  
contain more than the standard 1.5 ounces of alcohol and the amount of alcohol in beers can vary  
by as much as 40 percent. 
The term “proof” refers to the strength of a drink and is equal to twice the percentage of alcohol it 
contains. For example, a bottle of 80-proof whiskey contains 40 percent alcohol. 
The period over which you drink affects your alcohol concentration. If you consume more than one  
standard drink per hour, your alcohol concentration will increase. The effects of alcohol vary greatly 
among individuals due to factors such as age, gender, body weight, mood, food intake, metabolism  
and genetics. 
You may be affected differently by alcohol on different occasions due to fluctuating factors like mood, 
food intake and sleepiness. 
Men and women are affected differently by alcohol. Men generally have more muscle tissue, which  
does not absorb alcohol into the bloodstream as readily as fat. A person with a higher percentage of fat 
than another person of the same weight will reach a higher alcohol concentration by consuming  
the same amount of alcohol. 
The only way to reduce your alcohol concentration is to wait. Alcohol is generally eliminated at the rate 
of about one drink per hour, but many factors influence the amount of alcohol that is retained. The 
body eliminates 95 percent of alcohol through oxidation by the liver. The remaining alcohol is eliminated 
through breathing, sweating and urination. Drinking coffee, exercising and taking cold showers do not 
increase the rate of oxidation. 

Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Making lower-risk choices 
Social drinking frequently leads to impaired driving. The safest policy is simple: If you are going to drink, 
don’t drive; and if you are going to drive, don’t drink. 
Here are some alternatives to driving impaired: 
■ Designate a driver who will not drink. 
■ Call a taxi or a rideshare service. 
■ Call a friend or family member for a ride. 
■ Stay overnight at a friend’s house if you have been drinking. 
■ Take away the keys from a friend if they are impaired. 
Because alcohol consumption impairs judgment, it is crucial to make a plan while you are sober about 
how you will avoid impaired driving later. 
Minnesota Driving While Impaired (DWI) law 
A person with an alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or higher (0.04 percent if driving a commercial 
vehicle) who is in control of a moving or parked vehicle can be arrested for driving while impaired (DWI). 
If a law enforcement officer can prove that alcohol caused the driver to commit driving errors, the 
driver can be arrested for DWI with an alcohol concentration as low as 0.04 percent. 
This law also applies to the operation of off-road recreational vehicles and motorboats. 
Implied consent/search warrant law 
If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe you are impaired and are operating or in 
physical control of a motor vehicle, you must submit to a test of your blood, breath or urine. Refusing 
to take this test is a crime and will result in a revocation of driving privileges for one to six years, 
depending on the number of offenses on record. This law also applies to the operation of off-road 
recreational vehicles and motorboats. 
A law enforcement officer may ask you to blow into a roadside preliminary screening device, which 
helps the officer determine the amount of alcohol in your system. This pre-arrest breath test is used 
as an indicator of your alcohol concentration level, and the results have limited use as evidence in 
court. If you are arrested, you will be required to submit to a blood, breath or urine test that can be 
used as evidence. 
A law enforcement officer may ask you to take a test when you: 
■ Are under arrest for DWI. 
■ Refuse to take a pre-arrest breath test. 
■ Take and fail a pre-arrest breath test. 
■ Are involved in an alcohol-related crash that caused personal injury, property damage or death. 
The pre-arrest breath test can be beneficial to you if you appear intoxicated but are not. Some medical 
conditions have symptoms similar to those associated with intoxication, and law enforcement officers 
will obtain medical assistance for drivers who are ill. 

Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties 
Penalties associated with an alcohol-related revocation of a driver’s license include a $680 reinstatement 
fee, application for a driver’s license and possibly enrollment in the Ignition Interlock Device Program. 
Each offense has unique criminal penalties in addition to administrative sanctions, depending on the 
arrest situation, previous driving violations and criminal record. 
Penalties will be more severe if you: 
■ Have prior DWI arrests. 
■ Have an alcohol concentration of 0.16 percent or above. 
■ Have a child younger than 16 years of age in the vehicle at the time of the stop. 
■ Are under age 21. 
■ Refuse a pre-arrest breath test. 
If you are found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or above or refuse to take a test to 
determine an alcohol concentration, you may receive a seven-day temporary license. At the end of the 
seven-day period, your driver’s license will be revoked. 
First offense 
■ Minimum of 90-day revocation (30 days if you plead guilty to DWI). 
■ No work permit will be issued until a 15-day revocation period has passed, and until reinstatement 
requirements have been met. A work permit is not an option if you had an alcohol concentration 
of 0.16 percent or greater. 
■ Optional enrollment in the Ignition Interlock Device Program. 
■ 90 days in jail, a $1,000 fine or both. 
Second offense 
■ Minimum one-year license revocation if the second offense occurred within 10 years of the first offense. 
■ Possible required enrollment in the Ignition Interlock Device Program. 
■ One year in jail, a $3,000 fine or both. 
■ Impounded license plates. 
Third offense 
■ Loss of license for a minimum of three years if the third offense occurred within 10 years of the 
first two offenses. 
■ Canceled license. 
■ Required chemical use assessment. 
■ Required enrollment in the Ignition Interlock Device program. 
■ One year in jail, a $3,000 fine or both. 
■ Forfeited vehicle and impounded license plates. 
■ Jail or maximum bail and electronic monitoring. 

Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ignition Interlock Device program 
The Ignition Interlock Device program enhances public safety by monitoring alcohol offenders. The ignition 
interlock device is installed and connected to the vehicle’s starter. To start the vehicle, you must blow into 
the device. If the device detects an alcohol concentration at or above 0.02 percent, it prevents the vehicle 
from starting. 
First-time alcohol offenders with an alcohol concentration of 0.16 or above have the option to regain 
their driving privileges by participating in the Ignition Interlock Device Program. Drivers whose licenses 
are canceled and whose privileges are denied as “inimical to public safety” are required to enroll in the 
Ignition Interlock Device Program for a period of three to six years to regain full driving privileges. 
Felony DWI 
You may be charged with a felony DWI if you are arrested for a fourth DWI in a 10-year period, have 
previously been convicted of a felony DWI, or have been convicted of criminal vehicular homicide while 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs. A fourth offense may result in a loss of license for four years 
and until rehabilitation and other reinstatement requirements are met. The criminal penalties for 
felony DWI can include a sentence of up to seven years in prison with a five-year conditional release 
and a $14,000 fine. 
Underage drinking — no tolerance rule 
The legal age to buy and drink alcohol in Minnesota is 21. It is illegal for a person under age 21 to  
operate a motor vehicle with any detectable amount of alcohol in their system. If convicted of this  
offense, you will have your driving privileges suspended for 30 days. A second conviction will result  
in a suspension of driving privileges for 180 days. 
Commercial driver’s licenses and alcohol and controlled substances 
You will lose your commercial driver’s license for at least one year on the first offense if you: 
■ Drive a commercial vehicle when your alcohol concentration is 0.04 or more. If your alcohol 
concentration is less than 0.04 but detectable, you will be put out of service for 24 hours. 
■ Drive any vehicle when your alcohol concentration is 0.08 or higher. 
■ Refuse a blood, breath or urine test while driving any motor vehicle. 
■ Are under the influence of a controlled substance. 
■ Leave the scene of a crash involving a motor vehicle that you were driving. 
■ Use any motor vehicle to commit a felony. 
If the offense occurs while you are operating a commercial motor vehicle that is placarded for hazardous 
materials, you will lose your commercial driver’s license for at least three years. A second offense will 
result in the permanent loss of your commercial driver’s license. Using a commercial motor vehicle to 
commit a felony involving controlled substances will result in the permanent loss of your commercial 
driver’s license. Drivers who have a commercial license and are arrested for impaired driving in a 
passenger vehicle will be unable to obtain a work permit for a commercial vehicle during the 
withdrawal period. 

Chapter 8: Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other laws related to alcohol and controlled substances 
Cannabis 
It is illegal to operate a vehicle while under the influence of a cannabis product, lower-potency hemp 
edible, a hemp-derived consumer product, an artificially derived cannabinoid or tetrahydrocannabinols. 
Use 
It is illegal for you to use cannabis flower, a cannabis product, lower-potency hemp edible, a hemp-
derived consumer product, an artificially derived cannabinoid or any other product containing an 
artificially derived cannabinoid in a vehicle when the vehicle is on a street or highway. 
Possession and open package law 
It is illegal to possess cannabis flower or products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived consumer 
products or any other products containing artificially derived cannabinoids in a private motor vehicle 
on a street or highway if: 
■ The packaging has been opened or the seal broken 
■ Part of the contents have been removed from the packaging 
You may keep these products in the trunk of a vehicle or, if the vehicle does not have a trunk, in another 
area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver and passengers. You must not keep these prod-
ucts in the utility compartment or glove compartment of a vehicle. 
If the owner of a private vehicle is not present in the vehicle, it is also illegal for the owner to keep or 
allow these products to be kept in the vehicle when the vehicle is on a street or highway if: 
■ The packaging has been opened or the seal broken. 
■ Part of the contents have been removed from the packaging. 
Open container 
You must not drink or have an open container of any alcoholic beverage inside a motor vehicle when 
it is on a public street or highway. It is also unlawful to allow a passenger to drink, or to have an open 
container of, any alcoholic beverage inside a motor vehicle. 
Controlled substances in motor vehicles 
You must not use, possess or sell controlled substances in a motor vehicle. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information directory and index 
This chapter helps you locate services and information related to driving in Minnesota. 
Web services 
Online services and information are available at drive.mn.gov. Here’s a sample of what you can do: 
■Schedule or reschedule a road or Class D written test.
■Check to see if your driving privileges are valid.
■Report the sale of a vehicle.
■Renew your vehicle registration.
■Find the location of the office nearest to you.
■Print a driver’s license manual.
■Download forms and information related to driver’s licenses and the operation and ownership
of a motor vehicle.
■Find approved driver education schools and improvement clinics.
Office locations 
Driver’s license and motor vehicle services are available at more than 200 locations throughout the 
state. Office location information is available 24/7. Visit dps.mn.gov/mydvs or call 651-297-2005. 
Contacts 
Email: dvs.driverslicense@state.mn.us 
Road test scheduling (metro only) ......................................................................................651-284-1234 
Office locations ....................................................................................................................651-297-2005 
Driver’s license information ................................................................................................651-297-3298 
Commercial driver’s licenses (CDLs) information ................................................................651-297-5029 
Driver evaluation .................................................................................................................651-296-2025 
Ignition interlock .................................................................................................................651-296-2948 
No-fault insurance compliance............................................................................................651-296-2025 
Impounded plates ...............................................................................................................651-297-5034 
Vehicle registration and title ...............................................................................................651-297-2126 
Specialty plates ....................................................................................................................651-297-3166 
Customer assistance for hearing impaired..........................................................................651-282-6555 
95 
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL 

Information directory and index
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other state services 
State Patrol information line ...............................................................................................651-201-7100 
MnDOT road conditions ........................................................................................ 511 or visit 511mn.org 
MnDOT motor carrier services ............................................................................................651-215-6330 
Consumer information from the attorney general 
Office line ............................................................................................................................651-296-3353 
Toll-free ...............................................................................................................................800-657-3787 
Minnesota relay for hearing impaired .................................................................................800-627-3529 
Website: ag.state.mn.us/office/contactus.asp 
Voter registration 
When you apply for or renew a driver’s license or identification card and provide documentation of 
citizenship (such as a U.S. Passport, U.S. Birth Certificate or Certificate of Citizenship), your data will 
be automatically sent to the Office of the Secretary of State to register you to vote. 
If you have previously applied for a credential in Minnesota, DVS may no longer have a record of the 
documents you used to prove identity. You can provide documentation demonstrating citizenship to 
start the voter registration process under the new system. DVS will not send your data to the Office 
of the Secretary of State if you provided these documents before Oct. 1, 2023. 
If you do not wish to be registered to vote after providing DVS with citizenship documents, you must 
opt out with the Office of the Secretary of State. 
More information about voting can be found at: sos.mn.gov/elections-voting/register-to-vote 
Organ, eye and tissue donation 
Donating organs is a beautiful and selfless act that can save and heal up to 75 lives. The need for 
donors is significant, with thousands of people waiting for life-saving or life-enhancing transplants. 
When you apply for a Minnesota license or identification card, you can indicate your wish to become 
a donor after death. This indication serves as your consent. It is also important to share your decision 
with your family. Drivers under the age of 18 can also designate themselves as donors with their 
parent’s consent. 
■ Organs: Heart, lungs, liver, kidney, pancreas and intestines. 
■ Eyes: Whole eyes or corneas to help restore sight. 
■ Tissue: Used for reconstructive surgeries to repair damaged skin, heart defects and more. 

Information directory and index
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organs are allocated to recipients based on medical urgency, length of time waiting, genetic matching 
and geography. Additional Information: 
■The donation process does not prevent an open casket funeral.
■There is no charge for donation to the donor or their family.
■For more information about donating organs or tissue, visit donatelifemn.org or contact: LifeSource
at 1-888-5-DONATE (1-888-536-6283) or visit life-source.org.
■For information about donating whole eyes or corneas, contact the Lions Gift of Sight at 1-866-88-SIGHT
(1-866-887-4448) or visit lionsgiftofsight.umn.edu.
■For more information about donating tissue, contact American Donor Services at 1-877-365-DON8
(1-877-365-3668) or visit americandonorservices.org.

Information directory and index
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Index 
Aggressive driving.................................................................................................................................. 78 
Airbags................................................................................................................................... 1, 23, 39, 50 
Alcohol and driving................................................................................................................................ 89 
Animal safety......................................................................................................................................... 39 
Bicycles............................................................................................................................................ 47, 48 
Blind spots............................................................................................................................................. 28 
Campers and trailers ............................................................................................................................. 78 
Carbon monoxide.................................................................................................................................. 85 
Careless and reckless driving................................................................................................................. 44 
Carrying a projecting load ..................................................................................................................... 78 
Changing lanes ................................................................................................................................ 28, 51 
Child safety seat .................................................................................................................................... 38 
Commercial vehicles........................................................................................................................ 50, 51 
Crashes ...................................................................................................................................... 49, 77, 89 
Driver’s license 
Active military service....................................................................................................................... 20 
Applying for a license........................................................................................................................ 10 
Bring identification ............................................................................................................................. 9 
Commercial driver’s license disqualification..................................................................................... 88 
Commercial driver’s licenses ................................................................................................ 88, 93, 95 
Drugs and driving.............................................................................................................................. 89 
Emergency vehicle ...............................................................................................27, 30, 33, 44, 64, 76 
Endorsements............................................................................................................................. 18, 19 
Fees.................................................................................................... 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 16, 17, 21, 40, 87 
Getting your license............................................................................................................................ 8 
Graduated Driver’s Licensing ............................................................................................................ 15 
Instruction permit.................................................................... 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 77 
license classifications........................................................................................................................ 18 
Name change................................................................................................................................ 9, 10 
Peace Corps and federal foreign service employees ........................................................................ 20 
Provisional license .................................................................................................7, 14, 15, 16, 17, 77 
Renewal and replacement ................................................................................................................ 20 
Revocation ........................................................................................................................................ 87 
Road test....................................................................................................................................... 6, 95 
Suspension........................................................................................................................................ 86 
Vision screening.......................................................................................................................... 12, 15 
Who cannot be licensed ..................................................................................................................... 9 
Who does not need a Minnesota license ........................................................................................... 8 
Written test........................................................................................ 2, 6, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 40, 87, 95 
Driving while impaired ..................................................................................................................... 89 

Information directory and index
MINNESOTA DRIVER’S MANUAL
99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleeing a police officer .......................................................................................................................... 46 
Freeway driving ..................................................................................................................................... 73 
Highway work zones.............................................................................................................................. 53 
Identification cards...............................................................................................................2, 3, 8, 11, 21 
Ignition Interlock ............................................................................................................................. 92, 93 
Impaired drivers .................................................................................................................................... 89 
J-turns.................................................................................................................................................... 32 
Lanes 
Changing lanes............................................................................................................................ 28, 51 
Lane markings................................................................................................................................... 68 
Lane use control signals.................................................................................................................... 67 
Traffic lanes....................................................................................................................................... 27 
Motorcycles..................................................................................................................................... 18, 49 
Motorized bicycles .......................................................................................................................... 18, 49 
Parking................................................................................................................................. 35, 36, 56, 58 
Passing..........................................................................................................27, 34, 42, 44, 48, 50, 59, 68 
Pavement markings......................................................................................................................... 58, 68 
Pedestrians................................... 5, 13, 27, 28, 30, 35, 41, 43, 47, 48, 49, 50, 56, 59, 65, 66, 71, 82, 90 
Railroad Crossings ........................................................................................................................... 58, 59 
Registering your vehicle ........................................................................................................................ 40 
Right of way and yielding ...................................................................................................................... 43 
Roundabouts ......................................................................................................................................... 30 
Safety seat ............................................................................................................................................. 38 
School buses.................................................................................................................................... 23, 41 
School safety patrol............................................................................................................................... 43 
Seat belts..........................................................................................................................6, 12, 13, 23, 37 
Signaling ................................................................................................................................................ 27 
Signs .................................................................................................................................3, 52, 55, 57, 62 
Speed limits............................................................................................................................... 26, 27, 53 
Stopping .............................................................................................................................. 41, 51, 72, 76 
Traffic crash ............................................................................................................................... 13, 39, 86 
Traffic laws......................................................................................................................................... 3, 26 
Traffic signal......................................................................................................................... 41, 49, 57, 64 
Turns................................................................................................................................................ 28, 61 
Vehicle requirements ............................................................................................................................ 22 
What to do and expect when stopped by law enforcement ................................................................. 45 
Winter driving........................................................................................................................................ 79 
Zipper merge ................................................................................................................................... 53, 54 


drive.mn.gov
