2023-2024
 DR
IVE
RS'
 
MA
NU
AL 
SCAN THE QR CODE
TO VIEW THE
DIGITAL VERSION


GEORGIA DEPARTMENT OF DRIVER SERVICES 
CONTENIS 
LICENSES, PERMITS 
& IDENTIFICATION CARDS 
General Licensing Information 
4 
Obtaining a License, Permit 
8 
or Identification Card 
Testing Information 
12 
Other Services and Information 
14 
RULES, REGULATIONS, 
LAWS AND SAFETY 
Traffic Laws 
17 
Teen Driving Laws 
26 
Signs, Signals, and Markings 
28 
Safety Guidelines 
38 
Sharing the Road 
42 
Losing Your Driving Privileges 
46 
Crashes 
50 
DDS ONUNE SERVICES 
DDS MISSION & CORE VALUES 
Our Mission 
To provide secure driver and identity credentials to our 
customers with excellence and respect. 
Our Core Values: 
• Trusted Service
• Ethical Actions
#2023ReimaginingDriverServices 
• Accountable to All
• Motivated to Excellence
Title VI Policy Statement 
The Georgia Department of DrlVer Services (DDS) Is committed to compliance 
with Tltle VI of the Clvll Rights Act of 1964 and all related nondiscrimination 
authorities. DDS assures that no person shall, on the grounds of race, color, 
natlonal origin, sex, age, dlsablllty, low-Income, and Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP), be excluded from participation In, be denied the benefits of, or be oth­
erwise subjected to dlscr1mlnatlon under any program or activity. DDS further 
assures that every effort will be made to ensure nondlscrtnhatlon In all 
programs and actMtles, whether or not those programs and activities are feder­
ally funded. In addition, DDS will take reasonable steps to provide meaningful 
access to services for persons with Lmlted English Proficiency. Finally, DDS 
agrees to abide by the Title VI Program Assurances and to ensure that written 
agreements With any party for federally funded programs or services wlll lnciude 
the applicable Title VI language as provided In the Title VI Program Assurances. 
The DDS Title VI Program Coordinator Is responsible for oversight of the Title 
VI Program and ensuring compliance with the requirements provided In 49 
Code of Federal Regulatlons (C.F.R) Part 21 and 49 C.F.R. Part 303. The Title 
VI Program Coordinator and all Division Directors are authorized to effectlvely 
Implement the Title VI Program on behalf of the Department. 
Be certain to take advantage of DDS Online Services and avoid an unnecessary trip to a 
Customer Service Center. 
DDS Online Services enable thousands of Georgia drivers to conduct many transactions 
via dds.georgia.gov and eliminate a visit to a DDS Customer Service Center (CSC). This 
saves customers valuable time and money. DDS does not charge an additional fee for 
choosing Online Services. A $5.00 discount may apply for eligible license types that are 
renewed on the internet. 
For more information visit the DDS website at: 
dds.georgia.gov and like DDS on Facebook! 
The Information contained In this manual Is not Intended to be an official legal reference to the Georgia traffic laws. It Is Intended only to explain, In everyday 
language, those laws, driving practices, and procedures that you will use most often. It should be noted that the matertal In this manual Is subject to 
change to comply with amended State and Federal legislation. The department's primary statutory responslbllltles are set forth In Title 40 of the Official 
COde of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) This publication is produced by the DDS Governmental Affairs & Communications Division. 

-fu1m=0
GOVERNOR'S MESSAGE 
"I wish you safe passage and encourage you to 
exercise good judgment, follow driving laws, and 
prioritize safety for yourself, fellow motorists, and 
passengers." 
Brian P. Kemp 
Governor 
GEORGIA.GOV 
COMMISSIONER'S MESSAGE 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS' MESSAGE 
"Operating a vehicle is a 
tremendous responsibility, 
and we want you to be fully 
prepared to meet the 
challenges! Please pay 
particular attention to the 
sections on Traffic Laws, 
Teen Driving Laws and 
Safety Guidelines. By 
obeying all traffic laws 
and never driving 
distracted, we can ensure 
that our roads are safer 
for drivers and passengers 
alike." 
Spencer R. Moore 
Commissioner 
DDS2GO 
Board of Directors 
David W. Connell 
Chair 
JeffMarKey 
Vice Chair 
Britt Fleck 
Secretary 
Tony Guisasola-Member 
Rachel Little-Member 
Christie Moore-Member 
Bob Pierce-Member 
Sheriff Frank Reynolds-Member 
Kat Satterfield-Member 
The Department of Driver Services {DDS) Board of Directors would 
like to remind our customers that driving in Georgia is a privilege 
that carries many responsibilities. Please be a safe and dependable 
driver to ensure that this privilege will not be lost. This manual has 
two main purposes: 
(1) to help you qualify for a Georgia driver's license; and
(2) to help you become a safer driver.
This guide is designed to provide you with the information to obtain 
and keep this type of license. Other manuals are available for com­
mercial drivers and motorcycle operators. 
• 
2 
f l
►

What to Do and Expect When Pulled Over by Police (Revised January 2021) 
Police officers are responsible for conducting traffic stops when they have reasonable suspicion of a traffic violation or a 
criminal violation. Being stopped by an officer can be a stressful experience for the driver, any passengers, and for the 
officer, too. Knowing what to do during the stop will help ensure your safety and the safety of others. 
When you see emergency lights behind you, it is important for you and your passengers to stay calm and cooperate. 
Remember to: 
•
Activate your turn signal and pull off or to the side of the roadway as soon as it is safe to do so.
•
Turn off the engine and any audio devices.
•
Stay in your vehicle unless directed by the officer to exit.
•
Turn on your interior lights if you are pulled over at night to assist with visibility. Officers may use a spotlight for
additional visibility.
•
Keep your hands on the steering wheel or in a visible location so they are easily observable.
•
Follow all instructions the officer gives you or your passengers.
The officer may approach either side of the vehicle. When the officer approaches the vehicle, remember to: 
•
Lower the corresponding window so you and the officer can better communicate.
•
Let the officer know if you have a weapon in the vehicle upon first contact.
•
Wait for the officer's instructions before reaching for your driver's license or vehicle documents.
When conducting the stop, the officer will typically: 
•
Show their law enforcement credentials if they are not in uniform. If they do not show their credentials, you may
ask to see them.
•
Explain why you were stopped/ask questions about your trip.
•
Ask for your driver's license, proof of insurance, and vehicle registration. If the documents are out of your reach,
tell the officer where they are and wait for the officer's acknowledgement before reaching to retrieve the
documents.
In some cases, the officer may: 
•
Ask you to exit the vehicle. In this case, keep your hands visible, exit the vehicle, and stand in a location as 
directed by the officer.
•
Impose a sanction such as a warning, traffic ticket, which may include a fine, or arrest. The officer will
typically explain whatever action is being taken. If they do not, you may ask them to do so.
If you have questions, respectfully ask the officer to clarify. If you disagree with the officer's decision or course of action, 
do not prolong the contact by arguing with the officer. Rather, you may seek to contest the decision in court through 
established legal channels. Your acceptance and signature on a traffic ticket is not on admission of guilt. However, the 
refusal to sign a traffic ticket may result in your arrest. 
If you believe the officer acted inappropriately or have questions regarding their conduct you may request to speak to a 
supervisor. This is best done as soon as possible after the stop. 
Following these procedures can help make a traffic stop a safe experience for all parties involved. 
This guidance was approved by the AAMVA Driver and Law Enforcement Standing Committees, by the International 
Association of Chiefs of Police and the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives. 
[lli 
American AsscCtll.oft of 
MotorVehideAdmini,i1Jato.s 
®IACP 
International Association of 
Chiefs of Police 
4401 WILSON BLVD, SUITE 700, ARLINGTON, VA 22203 I 703.522.4200 I aamva.org
3 

-0 =0iilEll1 ll
GENERAL UCENSING 
INFORMATION 
This Section Covers 
Requirement to Obtain a 
Georgia Driver's License ....................................... 4 
Applicants under age 18 ....................................... 4 
Previous License, Instructional Pennits, 
or Identification Cards ........................................... 4 
Vision Requirements ............................................. .4 
Classes of Licenses ............................................... 5 
Fees/Fonns of Payment ........................................ 5 
License Restrictions ................................... 5 
Expired License ...................................................... 6 
Carrying and Displaying 
Your License ........................................................... 6 
Real ID Documentation Requirements ............. 6 
Requirement to obtain a 
Georgia Driver's Ucense 
Georgia law requires that any person want­
ing to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways 
of this state obtain a Georgia driver's Ucense or 
permit within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
A person meeting at least one of the following 
criteria is considered a Georgia resident accord­
ing to Georgia law (O.C.G.A. §40-5-1): 
• A person who has a permanent home or 
abode in Georgia and, when absent, has the 
intent of returning; 
• A person who accepts employment or en­
gages in any trade or occupation in Georgia 
or who enters his/her children in school; 
• Any person that has been in the state for 30 
days or more. 
Not required to obtain a Georgia 
Driver's License/Permit 
• Any employee of the United States govern­
ment who is operating a motor vehicle owned 
by or leased to the United States government 
or that is being operated on official business. 
This exemption does not apply if the em­
ployee is required by the United States gov­
ernment or any agency of the United States 
Government to have a state driver's license; 
• A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age 
and who has in his or her immediate posses­
sion a valid license issued to him or her in 
his or her home state or country. However, 
any restrictions that would apply to a Georgia 
driver's license as a matter of law would apply 
to any person who has an out-of-state license. 
• A nonresident who is on active duty in the
armed forces of the United States if he or she
has a valid license issued by his or her home 
state. 1nis includes their spouse or dependent 
son or daughter who has a valid license is­
sued by their home state; 
• Any person who is on active duty in the
armed forces of the United States and who 
has in his or her immediate possession a valid 
license issued in a foreign country by the 
armed forces of the United States. However, 
this license will only be accepted for a period 
of not more than 45 days from the date of his
or her return to the United States; 
• Any person temporarily driving or operat­
ing a farm tra tor or farm equipment on a 
hjghway for the purpose of conducting farm 
business; 
• Any member of the reserve components of 
the armed forces of the United States who is 
operating a motor vehicle owned by or leased 
to the United States government However, the 
motor vehicle must be operated in accordance 
with the duties of the person as a member of 
the reserve components of the armed forces; 
• Any person seeking to obtain a driver's li­
cense while he or she is taking the driving 
examination to obtain a license. This person 
must be accompanied by a Responsibile 
Adult with a valid driver's license and be at 
least 21 years of age or a certified driver 
examiner or agent of the department; 
• Any migrant farm worker who works in this 
state less than 90 days in any calendar year 
and who possesses a valid driver's license 
issued by another state; 
• Any resident who is 15 years of age or over 
while taking actual in-car training in a 
non-commercial training vehicle and while 
under the direct personal supervision of a 
DDS-licensed driving instructor. A driving 
instructor must test the eyesight of any un­
licensed person who v.ill be receiving actual 
in-car training prior to the training, and the 
person must meet the vision requirements 
listed on page 8 of this manual; 
• Any person who is operating a personal
transportation vehicle on any roadway
publicly maintained for the use of personal 
transportation vehicles only, or when cross­
ing a street or highway used by other types 
of motor vehicles at a location designated for 
such crossing by a motorized cart; 
• A nonresident of Georgia who is attending 
a school in this state, as long as: 
a He or she is at least 16 years of age and has 
in his or her immediate possession a valid 
license issued to him or her in his or her 
home state or country and a valid inter­
national driving permit if the license is in 
a language other than English; provided, 
however, that any restrictions which would 
apply to a Georgia driver's license apply 
to the privileges given to this person; and 
b. He or she is currently enrolled or was en­
rolled during the immediately preceding 
period of enrollment in a school in this 
state, has paid the tuition charged by the 
school to nonresidents of Georgia for the
current or immediately preceding period 
of enrollment, and has in his or her posses-
4 
f l
► 
sion proof of payment of such tuition paid 
for the current or immediately preceding 
period of enrollment. 
Applicants under age 18 -
automobile or motorcycle 
In addition to the requirements listed above, 
appHcants under 18 years of age must present 
proof of the following: 
• All applicants under 18 years of age must have 
a parent, legal guardian or responsible adult 
present to sign the application and complete a 
Responsible Adult Affidavit; 
• Completion of Alcohol and Drug Awareness 
Program (ADAP); 
• Satisfaction of school enrollment; see page 
30 for requirements; 
• For a Oass D license or for a Class M 
In­structional Permit (MP) at age 16 or age 
17 proof of completion of a DDS approved 
driver education program plus evidence of at 
least forty (40) hours of supervised driving, 
six of which must be at night. Additional 
details concerning these requiments can be 
found on page 26  of this manual or on our 
website at dds.georgja.gov. 
Previous Licenses, 
lnst111ctional Permits or 
Identification Cards 
Tn most cases, when applying for renewal, 
replacement or transfer of any license, instruc­
tional pennit, or identification card (ID Card) 
previously issued in Georgia or any other state 
or foreign jurisdiction, customers must surren­
der, the previously-issued license/permit/ID 
to DDS. Tn some cases, surrender of all valid 
licenses/permits/ID cards will be required. 
Most non-citizen customers with a valid 
out of country driver's license, permit, or ID, 
may retain their out of country document upon 
issuance of a Georgia-equivalent document. 
U.S. citizens will not be allowed to retain any 
licenses, permits, or identification cards issued 
to them by foreign countries. 
Vision Requirements 
Customers for initial issuance of a driver's 
license must demonstrate the ability to meet 
minimum 
vision 
requirements. 
The 
nurumum 
acceptable 
vision 
for 
a 
non­
commercial license is 20,60 in one eye, with or 
wi1hout corrective lenses, and a horizontal field 
of vision of at least 140 de--grees. If you are 
unable 
to 
pass 
the 
vision 
screen-ing 
administered at the DDS Customer Service 
Center, you will be given a Vision Report Form 
(DS-274) which must be completed by a licensed 
optometrist or opthalmologist and submitted to 
DDS. The completed form will be evaluated to 
determine if you are eligible to obtain a driver's 
license. This form may also be used to document 
the need for bioptic lenses for driving and is avail­
able on our website, dds.georgia.gov. 

--sECTION f: GENERAi. UCENSING INFORMATION 
If you must wear glasses or contacts to pass 
your initial vision screening, a corrective tens­
es restriction will be placed on your license 
when it is issued. Each time you complete a 
transaction, you will be required to indicate 
whether you require glasses or contacts for 
driving. If your answer differs from the re­
sponse in our records, you may be required to 
complete another vision screening or submit a 
current DS-274 for verification. 
Customers age 64 and over must successfully 
complete a vision screening every eight years. 
Customers who have obtained a license with a 
bioptic lenses restriction must provide updated 
medical information to the Department every 
two years. 
Classes of Licenses 
The issuance of licenses and permits in Geor­
gia is based on their categorinltion by Class. The 
various classes are associated with the types 
of vehicles that may be driven and the restric­
tions that apply to operation of those vehicles. 
Listed below are the non-commercial classes 
used in Georgia, along with a description of 
their purpose. 
Pursuant to House Bill 136 (2017), three­
wheel autocycles will not require a Class M 
Motorcycle Operator's License. Autocycles are 
defined as three-wheel motor vehicles that are 
NON-COMMERCIAL 
CLASSES 
Class 
C 
D 
M 
E,F 
Purpose 
Non-commercial license for 
drivers age 18 and older. (Also for 
drivers new to Georgia who are 
age 17 and who hold a valid Class 
C equivalent from another state.) 
Provisional license issued to 
drivers ages 16 and 17. 
License for motorcycle operators. 
Non-commercial license 
for drivers who operate 
commercial motor vehicles 
and who are exempt from 
commercial  licensing 
requirements. (Class E & F 
licenses are free for volunteer 
firefighters.) 
All instructional permits are
CP,MP, 
issued with the class designation
EP, FP 
followed by the letter "P." 
equipped with a steering wheel and not handle­
bars. DDS will not administer road tests that 
involve the use of an autocycle. 
Georgia also issues Class A, B, and C com­
mercial licenses. Information concerning these 
licenses is included in the Georgia ommer­
cial Drivers Manual, available at all DDS Cus­
tomer Service Centers and on our website at 
dds.georgia.gov. 
Fees/Forms of Payment 
The fees for obtaining non-commercial driv­
er's licenses, permits, and ID cards in person 
are listed below. This fee schedule is not ad­
justed to reflect the $5.00 discount for those who 
choose to renew online or via DDS 2 Go. All 
DDS Customer Service Centers accept cash, Visa 
and Mastercard credit and debit cards with a 
bank logo, and Discover and American Express 
credit cards and mobile pay options. We do not 
acxept checks,money orders, or cashier checks. 
VISA 
License, permit and ID card holders are al­
lowed one free name or address change per 
issuance term. Other changes can also be made 
at the time of the free name or address change 
at no charge. Any subsequent modifications 
require a full renewal at regular cost. Name 
changes must be in accordance with the require­ 
ments listed on page 16. 
A replacement driver's license, permit or ID 
card is a duplicate of the replaced document (no 
modifications or changes) and may be provided 
at a rost of $5.00 per occurrence. The replace­ 
ment license/permit/ID card will expire on the 
original expiration date. However, if a replaa.'­ 
ment is requested within 150 days of the original 
expiration date (or within 30 days of the original 
expiration date for a motorcyle instructional per­
mit), the license/permit/ID must be renewed for 
a new term at full cost. 
License Restrictions 
When issuing a driver's license, DDS is au­
thorized to impose restrictions on your driver's 
license, whenever there is good cause, to assure 
the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Any re­
strictions imposed will appear on your driver's 
license. If no restrictions are impoS(.>ci, the letter 
"X' will apperu· in the License Restrictions area 
on your license. The chart to the right lists the 
restriction codes used by DDS. Licenses may be 
issued with multiple restriction codes. 
LICENSE, PERMIT, AND 
IDENTIFICATION CARD FEES 
Type 
Driver's License (Class A, B, C, E, F, and M) 
Byr 
$32 
Driver's License (Class E and F) for Volunteer Firefighters 
Byr 
No Fee 
Provisional License (Class D) 
5 yr 
$10 
Instructional Permit (Class A, B, C and M) 
1 yr 
$10 
Replacement Duplicate License/Permit/ID Card' 
Original 
Expiration Date 
National Guard License 
8 yr 
No Fee 
Veteran License (Combat Veteran) 
a yr 
No Fee 
Veteran License (Non-Combat) Class A, B, C and M 
a yr 
$32 
Honorary License 
Byr 
No Fee 
Controlled Substance Permit 
Up to3 yr 
$25 
Habitual Violator Probationary License 
Up to3 yr 
$210 
Limited Permit 
Up to 1 yr 
$32 
Georgia ID Card 
8 yr 
$32 
Georgia ID Card for Voting Purposes Only (must provide 
a yr 
No Fee 
proof of valid voter registration) 
HVPULimited Permit Replacement 
Original Term 
$20 
Equal to Original Term 
Limited Permit Renewal 
$10 
of Permit 
Veteran ID Card (Combat Veteran) 
8 yr 
No Fee 
Veteran ID Card (Non-Combat Veteran) 
8 yr 
No Fee 
Handicap ID Card 
8 yr 
$5 
Address or Name Change 
Original Expiration 
Free Once 
Date 
per Term 
'If a replacement llcense/pem1lt/lD card Is requested within 150 days of the ortglnal date, the license/per-
mlt/1D card must be renewed for a new term at full cost. 
$10 

SECTION f: GENERAi. UCENSING INFORMATION -
Expired License 
DDS License Restriction Codes 
To renew a driver's license that has be 
expired more than hvo years, you must pass 
a vision test, a driving test, and an exam to tes 
your knowledge of road signs and road rules. 
You must also meet Real ID documentati 
requirements if you have not already done so. 
the information below for more informati 
about Real ID requirements. 
Caff'Y.ig and Displaying 
Your License 
You must have an appropriate driver's license 
or permit in your possession while operating a 
motor vehicle in the State of Georgia. If stopped 
while driving, you must display your driver's 
license/permit to any law enforcement officer 
upon his or her request. 
A 
B 
C 
E 
F 
G 
H 
J 
K 
M 
N 
0 
p 
a 
R 
no restrictions 
corrective lenses required 
vehicle mechanical aids required 
prosthetic aids required 
no manual transmission equipped 
CMV 
right exterior mirror required 
daylight hours only 
employer vehicle only 
left exterior mirror required 
automatic transmission required 
intrastate commerce only 
no air brake equipped CMV 
no class A passenger buses 
no class A or B passenger buses 
no tractor trailer CMV 
no passengers in CMV bus 
no passengers allowed 
no highway/intersate 
Real ID Documentation Requirements 
s 
power brakes or steering required 
T 
accompanied by disabled parent 
u
accompanied by visually Impaired
parent
V 
medical variance
w 
valid farm waiver required
X 
no cargo in CMV tank vehicle
y 
hearing aid required
z 
no full air brake
1 
bioptic lenses required
2 
Pursuant to Court Order
3 
Ignition Interlock Device restrictions
apply
4 
HPVL restrictions apply, no interlock
5 
business purpose only
6 
to and from medical only
7 
to and from school only
8 
Ignition Interlock required
9 
limited permit, no interlock
The following are examples of acceptable documents to bring with you to be issued a Real ID. 
• Identity Document - An original or certified document to prove WHO YOU ARE such as an original or certified Birth Certificate, US 
Pa sport, Certificate of aturalization, 1-551, etc. 
• You must know your full ocial Security Number. It will be verified with the Social ecurity Office electronically.
• Two Documents showing Georgia residence (e.g. utility bill, phone bill); Must be dated within the last six (6) months.
• Name Change - If your name is currently different than the "identity document" presented (such as birth certificate, passport, etc), 
you must provide a certified copy with seal; legal name change document (e.g. marriage certificate, divorce decree, etc.). NOTE: A
Document is reqo.ired even if your name is correct on c11rrent license/id. 
• Minor's may present passport; however, proof of go.ardianship requires original/certified birth certificate or certified court ordered
documents.
• Original immigration documentation must be submitted each time service is requested pertaining to a driver's license or 
identification card. 
• Gender change• A gender update requires applicants to submit a court order or physician's letter certifying gender change. The letter
or court order shall state the person's name, date of birth, date of gender reassignment operation and other identifying information.
Once you are issued a Real ID with a star in the upper right corner, 
you should be eligible to conduct future transactions without vi iting a center. 
Download the DDS mobile app, DDS 2 GO, for Eree to have a licensing office 
in your pocket! 
Important otice: Beginn.ing May 7, 2025, you will need a 
Real ID compliant card (with a star in the right corner) to fly within the U.S. 
or enter federal buildings or any nuclear power plant www.dhs.gov. 
U you would like to review and/or print a list of acceptable documents, please 
visit the DDS website at dds.georgia.gov. 
6 
f l
► 
 ouo.tn4S67t9 
J ooe 06/01/1984 
, cwt C 
.. "" 0$/2$12023 
, IMAGEOAGIA 
1 SAMPLE 
• 2208 EASfflEW MRKWAY 
OON'l'lM, 0A S001U76f 
_,. ...  
ll, A 
e.DIO HOtlE 
... .. 0$125/2018 
II WI p 
ltfl'ff 1110 
1,111;15'..ol" 
OIK.115
11 
I DO 1U456l'll9012:)t.5078110 ·ǟOOMOlt

0 =@uiEllJ@ 
OBTAINING A UCENSE, 
PERMrrOR 
IDENTIFICATION CARD 
This Section Covers 
Current Georgia Residents .................................... 8 
Class C Instructional Pennit (CP) .......................... 8 
Class D Provisional License .................................. 8 
Class C License ..................................................... 9 
state ID Card .......................................................... 1O 
Other License Types ............................................ 1 0 
Commercial Oliver's License .............................. 1 O 
Motorcycle Operator's License ........................... 10 
Licenses for Veterans of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and their Spouses .................................... 10 
National Guard License ....................................... 10 
New Georgia Residents ....................................... 1 o 
CURRENT 
GEORGIA 
RESIDENTS 
Class C lnst111ctional Permit (CP) 
For first-time issuance of a C lass C I 
structional Permit (CP), you must meet all 
requirements to obtain a Secure DUID if 
you have not already done so. See page 
6 for complete requirements. 
Obtaining a Class C 
Instructional Permit (CP} 
Upon reaching age 15, or anytime thereafter, 
you may apply for a Class C Tnstructional Per­
mit (CP}. The folJowing information will help 
you prepare for your visit to a DDS Customer 
Service Center: 
• You will be required to present documents
verifying your identity, U.S. citizenship or 
lawful presence, and Georgia residency as
explained on page 6.
• You must know your Social Security Number
or provide proof of your ineligibility to obtain
a Social Security Number. Sec the DDS website
al dds.georgia.gov for more information.
• U you are under age 18, you will be required
to present proof of school enrollment; see
page 26 for requirements;
• If you arc under age 18, a parent, legal
guardian or responsible adult will have to
sign the application, thereby giving their
consent for you to obtain a permit The
individual who signs your application may, for
any reason, revoke your permit until you reach
the age of 18;
• You will be required to pass a vision test.
Your eyes will be tested by means of a me­
chanical device;
• You will be required to pass a knowledge
exam related to Road Signs and Road Rules.
Please refer to page 12 for more 
information related to the knowledge 
exam; 
• The test fee is $10.00 and must be paid prior
to testing. If any part of the test is failed, no
refund will be issued. The permit foe must be
paid prior to every testing attempt
Conditions of a Class C 
Instructional Permit (CP) 
• Once issued a Oass C Instructional Permit
(CP), you may operate any 
Class 
C
vehicle when accompanied by a person at
least 21 years of age who is licensed to drive
a Class C vehicle, who is fit and capable of
exercising control over the vehicle, and who
is occupying a seat beside the driver;
• Class 
C 
Instructional Permits (0') arc
valid for up to 2 years.
Class D Provisional License 
For first-time is issuance of a Class D 
License, you must meet all 
requirements to obtain a Secure DL/1D 
if you have not already done so. See 
pages 10-11 for complete requirements. 
Obtaining a Class D 
Provisional License 
Upon reaching the age of 16, and after having 
held a valid instructional permit for one year 
and one day, you may apply for your Class D 
license.
-The folJowing information will help you
prepare for your visit to a DDS Customer
Service Center.
You will need to make a road test
appointment (see page 12);
• You must surrender your Oass C Instructional
Perm.it (CP) or affirm on your application
that you are unable to surrender the permit.
See page 15 for details concerning lost
licenses and permits;
• You will be required to present proof of
school enro11ment; see page 26 for require­
ments;
• You must present proof of completion of 
theAlcohol and Drug Awareness Program
(ADA!'). This program is taught in most
schools, and is also available onlinc. For
information about ADAP, you may visit
dds.georgia.gov;
• A parent, legal guardian or responsible adult
will have to sign the application, thereby
giving their consent for you to obtain a
license. The individual who signs your
application may, for any reason, revoke your
license until you reach the age of 18;
• You must pass a road test designed to
evaluate your ability to safely operate a
motor vehicle. See pages 12-13 for more
information related to the Road Test;
• You must satisfy the driver education
requirements listed under Driver Education
Requirements. (NOTE: Teens with parents
active in the U.S. Military can use an out of
state driver's education certificate provided
that it is within 9 months of their 16th
birthday.)
8 
•A 17-year-old v.'111 be exempt from holding their
learners permit for one year and one day with
proof that they are enlisted in the military. They
will be issued a Gass C license at issuance.
Driver Education Requirements 
To obtain a Class D license al the age of 16 or 17 you 
must complete both a driver education course 
approved by DDS and the Alcohol and Drug 
Awareness Program (ADAP). 
An approved driver education course consists of: 
•either 30 hours of classroom instruction OR
completion of an equivalent online virtual course;
AND
06 hours of on-the-road experience with a certified
instructor OR completion of the DDS Parent Teen 
Driving Guide available Online or at any CSC. You
must also have completed a cumulative total of al
least 4-0 hours of other driving experience, including al
least 6 hours at nighL A DDS provided affidavit must
be signed al the time of road testing to certify that this
requirement has been meL
NOTE: If the teen obtains the on-the-road component 
of driver's education from a certified instructor, a 
separate document affirming that this requirement has 
been met must be completed al the time of the road lcsL 
• If you have not completed the driver education
requirements, you cannot obtain a Class D license. For
information on approved driver education courses, see
the DDS website, dds.gcorgia.gov.
• The Alcohol and Drug Awareness Program (ADAP) is
taught in most schools and is also available online via
dds.gcorgia.gov.
Conditions of a Class D 
Provisional License 
• A Class D  license holder may not drive 
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
N0 EXCEPTIONS;
• During the first six months folJowing is­ 
suance, only immediate family members 
may ride in the vehicle. 'Immediate family 
member' includes the driver's parents and 
step-parents, grandparents, siblings and 
step­siblings, children, and any other person 
who resides at the driver's residence;
• During the second six months following is­ 
uance, only one passenger under 21 years 
of age who is not a member of the driver's 
immediate family may ride in the vehicle;
• After the first and second six-month periods, 
only three passengers under 21 years of age 
who are not members of the driver's 
immedi­ate family may ride in the vehicle;
• A Class D license holder must, for the 12 
months preceding application for their Class 
C license, be free from any convictions for 
major traffic violations that result in the 
mandatory suspension of a driver's license.

SECDON 2: OBTAINING A UCENSE, PERMrr OR IDENTIFICATION CARo---
Class C License 
For first..time issuance of a Class C Li­
cense, you must meet all requirements 
to obtain a Real DIJID if you have not 
already done so. See page 6 for 
requirements. 
Obtaining a Class C License -
Exchanging a Class D license 
A Class D license holder may apply for a 
Class 
license upon reaching the age of 18. The 
applicant must have held a valid Class D Ii ense 
until the age of 18, or for one year and one day, 
without having been convicted of any major 
traffic violations in the 12 months preceding 
his/her application. Upon surrender of the Class 
D license or affirmation on the application that 
the customer is unable to surrender the license, 
the applicant will be i ued a Cla C license at 
the cost of $32 for an 8 year license. No other 
documentation or testing is required for U.S. 
citizens. Sec pages 19-20 for details concerning 
I t licenses and permits. 
Obtaining a Class C License 
- Exchanging a Class C Instructional
Permit (CP)
A Cla C instructional Permit (CP) holder 
may apply for a lass license only if he or she 
has reached the age of 18. 
NEED A PEACH PASS? 
Register for one today at 
www.peachpass.com 
PEACHPASS 
To obtain a lass license, you must surren­
der your previously issued lass Instructional 
Permit (CP) or affirm on your application that 
you are unable to surrender the permit. You 
must also pass a road test designed to evaluate 
your ability to safely operate a motor vehicle. 
See pages 1-16 for more information related to 
the road test. Upon surrender of the Class C 
Instructional Permit ( P) or affirmation on the 
application that you are unable to surrender the 
permit, you will be issued a Class C license at 
the cost of $32 for a 8 year license. You must sign 
an affidavit verifying that you have completed 
40 hours of supervised road driving which in­
cludes 6 hours of night driving. See pages 15-16
for details concerning lo t licenses and permits. 
Obtaining a Class C License - 
Applicant Is Not Currently Licensed 
If you are at least 18 years of age and would 
" 
like to apply for a driver's license in Georgia for 
the first time, you have two option 
• Immediately apply for a Cla s C Driver's 
License. You must meet all documentation 
requirements listed on page 6, and 
successfully complete the knowledge and 
road testexaminations(seepages 12-13). You 
must also sign an affidavit affirming that you 
have completed 40 hours of supervised road 
driving which includes 6 hours of night 
driving;
• Apply for a Class C Instructional Permit 
(CP), which aJJows you to obtain practical 
driving experience under the supervision 
of a licensed driver. If you would like more 
information related to a ClassC Instructional 
Permit (CP) Knowledge test, please see page 
12.

--sECTION 2: OBTAINING A UCENSE, PERMIT OR IDENTIFICATION CARD
State ID Card 
For first-time issuance of a State ID Card, 
you must meet all requirements to obtain a 
Real ID DllID if you have not already done 
so. See page 6 for requirements. 
A State of Georgia ID Card may be obtained 
at any DDS Customer Service Center. The cost 
of this card varies depending on the type of 
card obtained. 
• An 8-year ID card is $32;
• All previous ID cards must be surrendered;
• If you no longer have possession of your
previous driver's license/JD card/permit to
surrender, you must provide a certified copy
of your Motor Vehicle Report (MVR), from
the previous state.
Upon submission of a referral from a DDS-­
approved non-profit agency, the applicant will 
be permitted to obtain an ID card at a cost of 
$5.00. 
A special ID card for persons with permanent 
disabilities is available for a term of eight years 
at a cost of $5.00. A card for persons with tem­
porary disabilities is also available for a term of 
six (6) months at a cost of $5.00. This card serves 
as proof of the need for special transportation 
services, seating accommodations, and other 
facilities for the handicapped. Verification from 
a licensed physician may be required to obtain a 
permanent Handicap ID, and is always required 
to obtain or extend a temporary Handicap ID. 
The fee for this card is waived for those who 
meet the quali6.cations listed on this page for a 
veteran's driver's license. 
Customers can also have the handicap sym­
bol placed on any other type of license, permit, 
or identification card. Customers have the op­
tion to include certain medical information on 
the back of their card as well. This information is 
also available at our website, dds.georgia.gov. 
A voter registration JD is also available at 
no cost for any individual who swears under 
oath that the ID is needed in order to vote in 
an election in Georgia. 
All applicants for ID cards must provide 
proof of identity, proof of U.S. Citizenship or 
lawful presence, proof of Social Security Num­
ber or ineligibility for a Social Security Num­
ber, and proof of Georgia residency. Sec pages 
10-11 for further information concerning these
requirements.
Other License Types 
Commercial Driver's License 
Detailed information concerning licensing 
requirements for Commercial Driver's Li­
censes can be found in the Commercial Driv­
ers Manual as well as on the DDS website at 
dds.georgia.gov. 
Motorcycle Operator's License 
Detailed information concerning licensing 
requirements for Motorcycle Operator's Li­
censes can be found in the Motorcycle Opera­
tors Manual as well as on th.e DDS website at 
dds.georgia.gov. 
 
Licenses for Veterans of 
the U.S. Armed Forces 
and their Spouses 
• All veterans who are GA citizens, actively
served, and released with any discharge
other than dishonorable, are eligible for a
free Veterans License/ID Card.
•
• The veteran should present their
original DD214 or a DS-516 issued by
the State Department of Veterans
Service to any DDS Customer Service
Center along with any other
documentation needed to prove identity,
lawful presence, and residency for
issuance of the license (see page 6).
The State Department of Veterans
Service will denote eligibility on the
DS-516;
Successfully pass a vision test for the
initial issuance of a Class C veteran's
license. To obtain any other class of
license, you must successfully complete
examinations for the class of license
desired.
10 
Honorary License - NO FEE 
The spouse of a disabled, honorably sepa­
rated veteran who does not have a driver's li­
cense, or the unmarried surviving spouse of a 
deceased honorably separated veteran, is enti­
tled to the same license available to the veteran. 
An applicant for this type of license must meet 
the same requirements as those required for a 
veteran's license. For the unmarried surviving 
spouse, the death certificate along with lhe ID-
214 must be submitted to the State Department 
of Veterans Service to obtain a Certificate o f  
Eligibility. 
National Guard License 
A free, distinctive, license may be issued to 
any member of the Georgia National Guard or 
active reserves in good standing who has had 
active duty. 
A Certificate of Eligibility(DS-318) form 
must be obtained from the local National 
Guard Commanding Officer and presented 
to any DDS ustomer Service Center. This 
license is renewable during the time of 
service in the National Guard or reserves 
until they are entitled to a Veteran's License. 
The form DS-318 must be presented. to the 
DDS upon every renewal of a 
ational 
Guard license. 
New Georgia Residents 
General Information 
You must apply for a Georgia driver's license 
or permit within 30 days of becoming a Georgia 
resident if you wish to drive upon the highways 
of this state. Please see page 4 for more informa-
Important: Veterans must bring their 
DD214 to any DDS Customer Service 
Center to be issued a free Veteran's 
License. If they do not have a DD214, 
obtain a Certificate of Eligibility 
(DS-516) from the State Department 
of Veterans Service.
Applicants must meet the following 
requirements for eligibility of a 
veteran's license:
•

===:-csEcnON 2: OBTAINING A UCENSE, PEAMrr OA IDENTIFICATION CARD ___ _
tion about requirements to obtain a license or 
permit and exemptions for certain individuals. 
New Georgia Resident Without 
a Valid License or Permit 
Issued by Another State 
Please see the appropriate chapter of this 
manual for obtaining a license or permit for 
the first time in Georgia 
• Under 18-see Teen Licensing Requirements
onpages26;
• 18 or Older - See page 6.
Transferring from Another 
State or District of Columbia 
Under Age 18 with valid out 
of state license or permit 
U you hold a valid driver's license or 
instructional permit issued by any other state 
of the United States or by the District of 
Columbia, you will no1mally be eligible to 
obtain a comparable license or permit issued 
by Georgia. All Georgia requirements 
including school registration, driver education 
and ADAP are required before the out of 
state license can be transferred. 
18 or Older with a valid out 
of state license or permit 
• You must surrender a valid license issued
by another state or territory of the United
States or by
the District of Columbia (expired less than 2 
years). If you are unable to surrender a valid 
driver's license, you must present a certified 
Motor Vehicle Report/Driving History from 
the state of issuance, dated within 30 days, 
showing your status as valid. Non-citizens 
are not required to surrender their foreign 
non-commercial license or permit; 
• Beat least 18 yearsofage,or17yearsof age if
surrendering a valid license equivalent to a
Georgia Class C license with no time, route,
purpose or passenger restrictions;
• You must lrnowyour full Social Security
umber which will be verified with the Social
Security Administration.
• Provide proof of identity. For a complete list
of acceptable documents, see page 6;
• Provide proof of citizenship or lawful pres­
ence in the United States (see page 6). All
documents must be originals or certified
copies. Faxed copies will not be accepted;
• Provide two documents to prove Georgia
residency. For a complete list of acceptable
documents, see page 6.
• Pass a vision test.
Transferring a License/Permit/ID 
From Another Country or U.S. Territory 
• U you do not have the out of country license/
permit/ID in your possession, you must pro-
vide a Motor Vehicle Report/Driving History 
(printed in English) dated within the last 30 
days, from the country of license issuance; 
• Most non-citizen customers with a valid out
of cow1try driver's license, permit, or ID may
retain their out of country document upon
issuance of a Georgia-equivaJen t document.
U.S. citizens will not be allowed to retain
any licenses, pennits, or identification cards 
issued to them by foreign countries; 
•
•
Successfully complete the knowledge, road,
and vision exams;
Present mandatory documents to prove iden­
tity, citizenship or lawful presence, Social
Security Number, and residency. See page 6
for the complete list;
• lf under the age of 18, additional rc.'quiremcnts
will apply. Please see pages 8-9 for more
details on teen licensing requifements;
• Licenses, permits and IDs issued outside the 
District of Columbia or any other state of the 
United States are non-transferable. A customer 
holding any document issued outside of the SO 
States or District of Columbia must complete 
the full process for issuance of a new document 
in Georgia, including all tests required for the 
class being requested, if applicable. 
• Citizens of certain foreign countli.es may be
exempt from knowledge and skills testing. For
a list, visit dds.georgia.gov.
ALL DMVs are not Alike!!! 
Beware of fake OMV websites that charge for training materials or informational material. 
Most customers arrive at these sites by doing a browser search for "Georgia OMV," 
"Georgia License Renewal" or similar generic searches. 
Please read the pages of these sites carefully, because by law they are required to 
inform users that the site is not affiliated with any State or Government Entity. 
They are privately owned sites that will have .com or .org at the end of their website 
address (urQ. The official state of Georgia websites will have .gov as is the case with 
www.dds.georgia.gov. 

-0 =0iilEm gJ
TESTING 
INFORMATION 
This Section Covers 
Knowledge Exam ................................................. 12 
Road Signs .......................................................... 12 
Road Rules .......................................................... 12 
Road Test ............................................................... 12 
Making Road Test Reservations .......................... 12 
Road Test for aass c or D .................................. 12 
Road Test for aass M ......................................... 13 
Road Test for Class E and 
F Non-Commercial.. ............................................ 13 
Road Test for a ass A, B, and C Commercial ..... _ .13 
Results of Pass/Fail ............................................. 13 
Knowledge Exam 
Knowledge exams are given on a walk-in 
basis at every DDS Customer Service Center 
statewide. To ensure that an applicant has ad­
equate time to complete the knowledge exam, 
customers must begin taking the written test at 
least 30 minutes prior to closing. Please check 
the hours of operation before you visit on our 
website at dds.georgia.gov. 
We offer special assistance for customers 
with reading disabilities and hearing impair­
ment. Please visit your local CSC to schedule an 
appointment for an oral exam or to schedule an 
interpreter for the hearing impaired. 
The road rules tests are available in some 
non-English languages, but ail drivers must 
show ability to read and understand simple 
English such as is used in highway traffic and 
directional signs. Road signs and the actual 
driving test are conducted in English only. 
These basic rules must be followed while a 
knowledge exam is being given: 
• You may not bring pens, pencils, paper, or
any other items into the testing area;
• All cell phones, text messaging devices, and
other types of wireless devices are prohibited
in the testing area;
• You may not speak to anyone during the test
other than the examiner administering the test.
Any violation of these rules is consid­
ered misconduct. If misconduct occurs during 
the administration of the knowledge exam, the 
exam session will be counted as a failure. 
The questions on the knowledge exam per­
tain to topics discussed in this manual and 
consist of the following components: 
Road Signs 
A set of questions on the meaning of standard 
highway signs will be given. This test is given in 
English only. You will be asked to identify cer­
tain signs, signals and markers. You must cor­
rectly answer 15 out of 20 questions to pass. You 
may take a practice test at dds.georgia.gov. 
Road Rules 
The road rules test consists of a set of ques­
tions about driver responsibility, knowledge of 
laws, and safe driving practices applicable to 
the class of license for which you are applying. 
You must correctly answer 15 out of 20 ques­
tions to pass. You may take a practice test at 
dds.georgia.gov. 
Road Test 
Making Road Test Reservations 
The Road Skills Test is administered by 
appointment only. Appointments allow us to 
maximize our resources and to serve all of 
our customers more efficiently. To make an 
appointment, please visit DDS Online 
Services at dds.georgia.gov. 
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems 
Drivers may perform the skills test in vehicles 
equipped with advanced driver assistance 
technology. However, the applicant must 
demonstrate their ability to operate the vehicle 
without such technology. 
Road Test For Class C or D 
• DDS will only administer a Class C or D
road test in a four-wheel vehicle;
• You must provide the vehicle for the road test;
• All road test vehicles must have a valid reg­
istration/license plate, or if equipped with a
temporary dealership tag, the applicant must
provide the bill of sale for proof of purchase
within the last 30 days (7 days if the vehicle
is purchased from a third party);
12 
• All road test vehicles must be covered by liabil­
ity insurance (you must show a valid insurance
card or Motor Vehicle registration card that 
shows the VIN) and pass a safety inspection; 
• If the vehicle is not equipped with illumi­
nated tum signals, you must be able to pass
the road test us.ing hand signals;
• You may take the test in a rental vehicle.
Please be advised that many rental agree­
ments do not allow vehicle use for driver
training or testing. Additionally, you must
meet the following conditions:
" You must provide a copy of the rental
contract (the contract will be reviewed to 
determine if testing is allowed); 
» You must be listed as a driver on the rental
contract;
" You mustprovide proof of valid insurance 
for the vehicle. 
The driving test will not be conducted if 
weather conditions or any other conditions 
are determined to be unsafe for the driver or 
examiner. DDS will make every effort to ensure 
that impacted customers are rescheduled as 
soon as possible. 
For the driving test you will be expected to 
demonstrate your ability to do all of the fol­
lowing: 
• Parallel Parking: Park midway between
two standards so that your car is not more
than 18 inches from the curb. The standard
parallel parking dimensions utilized in the
driver's license test are 22 feet in length by
10 feet in depth;
• Straight Line Backing: Back your car for 
a distance of approximately 50 feet at a slow 
rate of speed (not more than 10 miles per
hour) as straight and as smoothly as possible.
You must turn your head and look behind the
vehicle while backing. No boundary lines
should be encroached;
• Stop for Signs or Traffic Signals: Give
the proper hand or brake signal; approach
in the proper lane; stop before reaching a pe­
destrian crosswalk and remain stopped until
all pedestrians have cleared the crosswalk
on the side of the roadway upon which you
are traveling; move through the intersection
only when you may do so safely;
• Turn About: Turn your car in a narrow space
using a three-point turn;
• Use of Clutch: If your car has a manual
h·,msmission, you must shift smoothly and
correctly;
• Approaching Intersections and Corners:
You must be in the proper lane and look in 
both directions;
• Yielding Right-of-Way: Always yield right­
of-way to pedestrians, vehicle operators, and
bicyclists who move into the intersection be­
fore you by stopping and remaining stopped
until they have cleared the intersection;
• Turning: Move into the proper lane and
signal an adequate distance before the tum;
•
Your non-commercial road test may be
administered in a virtual or traditional
format.
Virtual Road Test
Conducted remotely by an Examiner who 
administers the test via a dual-facing camera 
and a hands-free cellular device. A parent, 
guardian, or other responsible adults; 21 years 
of age or older must serve as a passenger in 
the testing vehicle.  They must have a valid 
driver's license.
Traditional Road Test
Conducted by an Examiner who administers 
the test while being seated in the passenger 
seat of the testing vehicle. 

• Passing: Always check in front of and be­
hind your vehicle to make sure you can safely
pass without interfering with other traffic;
• Following: Do not follow other cars too
closely. Follow at a safe distance from the
vehicle in front of you in order to maintain
control of the vehicle in case of any emer­
gency situation or abrupt stops or turns;
• Maintaining Good Posture: Keep both
hands on the steering wheel. Do not rest your 
elbow on the window and do not attempt to
carry on a conversation with the examiner
because he/she will be busy giving instruc­
tions and recording your score.
At the end of the Cla 
C/D road test, the
license examiner will gladly show you your 
score sheet and will provide you an opportunity 
to discuss the results if you wish to do so. You 
must achieve a minimum score of 75% to pass. 
Road Test For Oass M 
You must furnish a motorcycle for the test and 
pass a safety inspection of the motorcycle by the 
license examiner before the driving test is given. 
All road test vehicles must have a valid registra­
tion/license plate or if equipped with a temporary 
dealership tag, the applicant must provide the bill 
of sale for proof of purchase within the last30days. 
Motorcycle operator testing information is 
covered in the Motorcycle Operators Manual, 
which is available at all DDS Customer Service 
Centers and online at dds.georgia.gov. 
If you hold a motorcycle pennit, you may 
schedule a motorcycle skills test appointment 
online at dds.georgia.gov. 
Motorcycle road tests cannot be conducted 
when the weather conditions make it unsafe 
for the driver or examiner, including when it is 
raining or when the pavement is damp. 
SECTION 3: TESTING INFORMATION ---
Road Test For Class E and 
F Non-Commercial 
There is no driving test for Classes E & F 
Non-Commercial; however, you must present 
an Application for Issuance ofNon­
Commercial E/F license (DS-36), establishing 
your ability to operate vehicles within the 
particular class, and pass a lmowl.edge test for 
that particular class. You must also possess or 
be eligible to obtain a Cass C Driver's license. 
Cass E & F licenses are available to volunteer 
firefighters at no charge. 
Customers who wish to take the non com­
mercial Cass E/F exam should study the 
Commercial Drivers Manual. The Commer-cial 
Drivers Manual can be located online at 
dds.georgia.gov or customers can obtain a hard 
copy at any DDS Customer Service Center. 
Road Test For Class A, B, 
and C Commercial 
ommercial vehicle operator's testing informa­
tion is covered in the Georgia Commercial Drivers
Manual, which is available at all DDS Customer 
Service Centers and online at dds.georgia.gov. 
You may schedule a Commercial skills test 
ap­pointment Online at www.dds.georgia.gov. 
Pursuant to 0. .G.A. §40-5-25 and DDS Rule 
1-1-.09(7), the $50.00 Commercial Driver's
cense (CDL) Road Skills Test fee is now
required for each testing attempt.
Results of Pass/Fail 
If you pass all the tests, you will be issued 
a temporary license/permit. Your 
permanent license/permit will be mailed 
to you 
If you fail any part of the Class C or D 
knowledge or road test, and it is your: 
•lSt Failure: You must wait until the
next day before retaking the portion you
have failed.
•2nd or Subsequent Failure: You must
wait 7 days before retaking the portion
you have failed.
For CDL Testing information please 
consult the Georgia CDL Manual.
Location Information 
For a complete list of customer Service Centers 
and their hours of operation, please visit the 
DDS website at dds.georgia.gov or https:// 
dds.georgia.gov /locations/ customer-service­
center. 
Please remember that Tuesday is always the 
busiest day and the best time to visit in person is the 
middle of the week during the middle of the day. 

-0 =0iilEll] 4J
OTI-IER SERVICES 
& INFORMATION 
This Section Covers 
Renewal for Individuals Temporarily Located 
Out of the State of Georgia .................................... 14
License, Permit, or Identification Card 
NumberChanges ................................................... 14 
Voter Registration ................................................. 14
Lost or Stolen License Replacement .................. 15 
DDS Online Services .......................................... 15
Address Change ..................................................... 16 
Name Change ......................................................... 16 
Motor Vehicle Reports {MVR) ............................... 16 
Selective Service Registration ............................. 16 
Donations ............................................................ 16 
Renewal for Individuals 
Temporarily Located Out 
of the State of Georgia 
Renewal by mail is of
fored for certain groups 
of individuals who must be away from the State 
of Georgia at the time renewal of their license 
is required. Supporting documentation, a 
completed application and payment of fee (if 
required) must be submitted to verify that the 
applicant is eligible to renew in this manner. 
This service is available to the following groups: 
• Customers stationed out of state on active
military duty, their spouse and any depen­
dents living with them;
• Full-time students attending school outside
Georgia, their spouse and any dependents
living with them;
• Customers who are physically incapacitated
and unable to visit a DDS Customer Service
Center may be issued an ID Card only.
lbis service is subject to the following
restrictions:
• The renewal will be granted for an 8-year re­
newal period, at the end of which the license
holder must appear in person for renewal;
• A driver's license that has been expired for
two (2) or more years cannot be renewed
by mail.
• Changes (name, address, etc.) must be made
in person at a DDS Customer Service Cen­
ter. Changes cannot be made using the mail
method of renewal.
Customers who choose to renew their license
in this manner will not receive a RealDL/ID. 
To download the application package and 
complete instructions, please visit our website 
at dds.georgia.gov. 
License, Permit, or 
Identification Card 
Number Changes 
No licenses or identification cards may be 
issued in Georgia with a Social Security um­
ber as the document number. U your license, 
permit or identification card number is identical 
to your Social Security Number, a randomly 
generated document number will be assigned 
to your document during the issuance/ renewal 
process. Once your number has changed, you 
will need to ensure that any companies or enti­
ties using your driver's license, permit, or identi­
fication card number for tracking or verification 
purposes, such as insurance companies, are 
aware of this change. 
Interest in Registering to Vote 
DDS docs not register customers to vote. DDS does confidentially transmit customer information needed to begin the voter registration 
process to the Georgia Secretary of State's Office (SOS). 
Ultimately, each county voter registrar is responsible for completing voter registration including the issuance of a voter registration card. 
·There is a voter registration section on each DDS license/ID issuance application, as required by law. In that section, customers are notified
that their information will be used for voter registration purposes unless they choose otherwise. There is also a clear 'opt-out• box that the
customers can check if they do not wish Lo register lo vote or update their information.
Once the information is transmitted to the SOS, it is made accessible to the county registrars for processing and updating their voter records. 
Important Points:
• If you do not receive your voter registration card within 30 days, contact
your county voter registration office to determine the status of your
application;
• Choosing this option does not guarantee that your voter registration
information will be processed in time to meet specific election deadlines;
• If you want to register to vote for a particular dection, please contact
your county voter registration office to ensure that your most current
registration information is recorded prior to the applicable voter
registration deadline. Visit http:/ /sos.ga.gov/ index.php/elections for 
information.
14 
f l
► 
https://sos.ga.gov/index.php/elections 

Lost or Stolen License 
Replacement 
Customers may apply for a replacement driv­
er's license and/or ID card at a local DDS Cus­
tomer Service Center or online. U you choose to 
apply online, you will go through an authentica­
tion process in order to verify identity. If you 
wish to apply at a DDSCustomerServiceCenter, 
you will be required to show proof of identity. 
The fee online and at a DDS Customer Service 
enter is 10.00. 
The following documents will be 
acceptable proof of identity for a 
replacement Georgia driver's license, permit 
or identification card: 
• Certified Copy of Birth Certificate with raised
or impressed seal;
• Certificate of Naturalization or
Certificate of Gtizensh.ip;
• Expired Georgia Driver's License, Permit or
Identification Card;
• U.S. Passport or Passport Card-Must Be
Valid
• Consular Report of Birth Abroad;
• Expired Georgia Interim;
(Continued on next page) 
SECffON 4: OTHER SERVICES & INFORMATION -
DDS ONUNE SERVICES 
Save Time, Go Online-Try DDS Online Services! 
License, Permit, and ID Card Services* 
• Make a road test appointment;
• Reinstate your driver's license;
• Renew your driver's license,
permit or ID card;
• Replace a lost driver's license,
permit, or ID card;
• Upgrade a Class D license
to a Oass C license;
Other Services Available 
• Immediately create a secure user account
and track updates to your license status;
• Conduct multiple services at one time;
• View and/or download a copy of
your driving history (MVR);
• Request a certified driving history (MVR);
• Pay 'Failure to Appear' fee or reinstate
a 'Failure to Appear' suspension;
• Pay 'Super Speeder' fee or reinstate
• Change your address;
• Request an ID card (must have
valid license or permit on file);
• Check license status and moving
violation points;
• Check CDL Self Certification and
Medical Documents status;
• Get suspension information.
a 'Super Speeder' suspension; 
• Take a practice written test for
a regular driver's license;
• Download the most recent
version of the Drivers Manual;
• Complete and Submit form to DDS
before arriving for service.
• Apply for For-Hire license
endorsement;
• Register for a Motorcycle Safety course.
*Some on line services are available if all requirements are met, including completion of Real
ID requirements (see page 6 for details).
ONE of these documents:

-
SECTION 4: OTHER SERVICES & INFORMATION
• Non U.S. Citizens
- Valid foreign passport with valid I-94;
- Valid permanent resident card (l-551);
- Valid employment authorization card
(l-766 or I-688A or I-6888) with proof
of pending application to adjust status;
or TWO of these documents (only if replac­
ing license, permit, or ID card): 
• Social Security Card (original or copy);
• Original or Certified Copy of Marriage Cer­tificate;
• Previous Year's Income Tax Return or W2;
• Current Auto, Home, Life or Health Insur- ance
Policy (Cards Not Ace pted);
• Current Auto Registration Receipt;
• Voter Registration Card;
• Valid or Expired Military ID Card and/or 
Military Orders;
• Valid Georgia Gun Permit.
• TWIC
• Check Stub
To change the number on your replacement
Georgia driver's license, permit or identification
card, you will be required to present a police
report indicating that the license was stolen
unless your license number and your Social
Security number are the same. If the two
numbers are the same, no police report is
required.
Address Change
• You must update your record with DDS any­
time your address changes. DDS correspon­
dence will not be forwarded to new addresses 
by the U.S. Postal Service.
• If you have moved, you must visit a DDS
Customer Service Center within 60 days
to update your mailing and/or residential
address, or you may visit our website at
dds.georgia.gov to change your address. If
you change your address in person, you
must provide proof of the change in address.
If you change your address online, your new
address will be verified through USPS.
Name Change 
• Name changes must be completed in person
at a DDS Customer Service Center;
• lf you change your name by marriage or oth­
er legal action, you must obtain a new license
showing the correct name within 60 days. A
free replacement license valid for the current
term will be issued once in a license term;
• ln order to change yourname on yourlicense
or identification card, you must present a
certified copy of a marriage license applica­
tion (if the marriage occurred in Georgia),
marriage license, state-issued marriage cer­
tificate, or court-ordered name change;
• You may change to a hyphenated surname
on your license or identification card if the
marriage occurred in the State of Georgia on
or after November 1, 1982 A certified copy of
the marriage license application reflecting the 
selection of the hyphenated surname must be 
presented at the time of the request. 
Motor Vehicle Reports (MVR) 
MVRs are available in 3-year, 7-year, or life­
time formats. A 3 year report is $6.00; a 7 year 
report is $8.00. A lifetime report is $8.00. lndi­
viduals may obtain a copy of their MVR in any 
of the following ways: 
1. Via Internet
A non-certified copyofyourMotorVehicle
Report (MVR) can be downloaded by using DDS 
Online Services. Please visit dds.georgia.gov 
for further details. You will be required to cre­
ate an account if you have not already done so. 
2. In Person
A certified copy of your Motor Vehicle Report
(MVR) can be purchased in person at any DDS 
Customer Service Center. Proper identification 
will be required. 
If obtaining a motor vehicle report other than 
your own, the following is required: 
• Completion of the Request for MVR form
(DDS-18) from the licensee naming the per­
son authorized to receive the record, includ­
ing the full name, date of birth, and Georgia
driver's license number of the licensee;
• The person receiving the report for another in­
dividual must also show proper identification. 
3. Via Mail 
You can obtain a certified copy of your MVR 
by submitting the Request for MVR form (DDS-
18) OR a letter requesting either a 3-year, 7-year,
or lifetime MVR, including the following:
• Your full name as it appears on your driver's
license;
• Driver's license number;
• Date of birth; and
• Complete mailing address.
Requests may be mailed to: Georgia Depart­
ment of Driver Services, MVR Request, Post 
Office Box 80447, Conyers, Georgia 30013. When 
requesting a MVR, please include a money or­
der, cashier's check, or personal check made 
payable to the Department of Driver Services 
in the amount of $6.00 for a 3-year or $8.00 for 
a 7-year or lifetime MVR. 
Selective Service Registration 
At the time of any license or identification 
card transaction, DDS is required to ask males 
age 18 whether they have registered with the 
U.S. Selective Service System and to report the 
responses to the U.S. Selective Service System. 
Blindness Donation 
When you obtain your driver's license, perm it, 
or ID, you will have the opportunity to make a 
voltmtary donation of $1 to Georgia's Blindness 
Education, Screening, and Treatment Program, 
which is administered by the Georgia Depart-
16 
ment of Public Health. Donations currently fund 
vision programs which provide screenings to 
save children's vision, eye exams for needy 
adults, training for people who have lost vision, 
and public education about eye donation Your 
voluntary donation will be added to the total 
cost of your service. 
Organ and Tissue Donation 
The Donate Life Georgia Organ, Tissue and 
Eye Donor Registry was created in 2008 to allow 
Georgians an easy and user-friendly means of 
joining the state's donor registry. Georgians 
can join the registry through the website at 
www.donatelifegeorgia.org, when renew­
ing their driver license or ID online, or when 
obtaining/ renewing their license or ID at a lo­
cal DDS Customer Service Center. You can also 
join the Donor Registry by calling Donate Life 
Georgia 
directly 
at 
1-866-57-SHARE 
(1-866-577-4273) and requesting a donor 
registry form. 
Other things to Remember: 
• Organ donation can occur only after every
measure has been taken to save your life,
and only after death has been legally and
medically declared;
• Georgia law prohibits the physician who de­
clares a patient dead from participating in the
removal or transplantation of that patient's
donated organs or tissues;
• There is no cost to the donor's family for any
expenses related to organ tissueϥye dona­
tion. Also, there is no delay in funeral ar­
rangements;
• Georgia law requires hospitals to notify an
organ/tissue/eye recovery center when a
donation is possible;
• Recipients are selected by urgency of need,
compatibility of blood type, body size, and
tissue type, regardless of sex, race or creed.
More information concerning organ and tissue
donation can be found at
www.organdonor.gov.
GSFA Donation 
DDS offers the opportunity to make a volun­
tary charitable contribution of $1, $5, or $10 to 
the Georgia Student Finance Authority (GSFA) 
during the license issuance or renewal process. 
Pursuant to HB 54 (2016), this donation will heIp 
to provide financial assistance toward the 
post­secondary 
educational 
costs of the 
children of law 
enforcement 
officers, 
firefighters, paramedics, emergency medical 
technicians, and prison guards employed by 
the state or other 
public 
employer 
who 
were permanently disabled or killed 
in the line of duty. 
Toe children of 
High-way Emergency Response Operators 
who we.r e permanently disabled or killed in 
the line of duty are also included. 

-0 =0iilEll] 0
TRAFFIC LAWS 
Laws Governing Right-of-Way .......................... 17 
Georgia's Move-Over Law ................................. 18 
Passing ........................................................... 18 
How to Pass on a Two-Lane Road.. 
. .. 18 
Passing is Prohibited on Tպ-Lane Roads ........ . ..... 18 
Passing is Pennitted When ....................................... 19 
Passing On The Right .............................................. 19 
When Someone Passes You................ 
. ......... 19 
Passing Stopped Gars ............................................... 19 
Passing Bicyclists ................................ ......... 19 
Passing Motorcyclists.. . . .. . ... . .. . .. . ... . . .. . ... . 
19 
Weaving .................................................................... 19 
Tum Signals and Making Tums Safety ................ 19 
Illegal Signals ...................................................... ..... 19 
How To Make A Right Tum ....................................... 19 
HowToMakeALeftTum ......................................... 19 
Watching for Pedestrians When Making Turns ......... 20 
lHIIIIS ...................................................................... 20 
Making Tums on Multi-Lane Highways ................... .20 
Stopping, Standing, and Par1<ing ....................... 20 
Steps to Parallel Parking ................................... 20 
Backing Up ............................................................... 21 
Traveling Speed ....................................................... 21 
Super Speeder .......................................................... 21 
Speed Limits .............................................................. .21 
Driving Too Slowly ..................................................... 21 
Railroad Crossings .................................................. 21 
Highway Wor1< Zones ............................................. 22 
Reduce Your Speed .................................................. 22 
Obey the Signs .......................................................... 22 
Obey Raggers ........................................................... 22 
Yield to Amber Lights in Work Zones ........................ 22 
Adjust Your Lane Position .......................................... 22 
Yield to Mobile Work Vehicles ................................... 22 
Work Zone Driving Tips ............................................. 22 
Other Laws ....................................................... 23 
Controlled-Access Roadways ................................... 23 
Coasting ................................................................... .23 
Driving Under the Influence of Drugs or Alcohol. ........ 23 
Reckless Driving ....................................................... 23 
Racing ...................................................................... .23 
Aggressive Driving .................................................. 23 
Drag Racing/.Reckless Stunt Driving .............. .23 
Trucks and Vehicles Pulling Trailers .......................... 23 
Riding in Trailers ......................................................... 23 
Median stlip ............................................................... 23 
Impaired Hearing and Vision ..................................... 23 
Obstructing the Driver's View .................................... .23 
Opening Vehicle Doors .............................................. 23 
One Way Streets ........................................... ........... 23 
Stopping ................................................................... 23 
Use Headlights Properly ........................................... 2 4 
Night Driving ........................................................... 24 
Georgia's Litter Control Law ..............•......•... 24 
Safety Belts 
.... 24 
Safety Restraints for Children ....................... 24 
Distracted Driving/Following Emergency Vehicles ...... 24 
3 MOST BASIC TRAFFIC LAWS 
The three most basic traffic laws require drivers to: 
1. Obey traffic control devices (lights and signs);
2 Obey the traffic directions of a law enforcement officer or firefighter, even if it goes
against what the traffic control devices tell you to do; 
3. Never drive on a roadway that has been dosed for construction, for the purpose of a
special event, or for any other official reason.
Traffic laws are necessary to prevent crashes 
by defining the orderly movement of vehicles, 
pedestrians, and other users of public highways. 
Remember, traffic laws exist for your safety; fail­
ure to obey them can result in crashes that may 
seriously injure or kill you or others. To obey the 
laws, you must first know and understand them. 
Laws Governing Right-of-Way 
Right-of-way is a phrase used to describe 
who has the lawful authority to enter a roadway, 
change lanes with.in a roadway, make a tum 
from a roadway, travel through an intcrst.>c­
tion, or make any other traffic related move­
ment. Georgia law establishes right-of-way in all 
situations. Vehicle drivers (including bicyclists) 
and pedestrians should always understand the 
rules related to right-of-way, and remember that 
right-of-way is something to be given, not taken. 
There may be instances in which you as a driver 
or pedestrian have the legal right-of-way over 
someone else, even though the other person 
does not realize it and is not obeying the rules 
of the road. In those instances, the right-of-way 
should be yielded in order to prevent a crash. 
The following is a list of the most common 
situations in which right-of-way questions are 
faced in real life: 
• When traveling on a roadway that intersects
with another roadway, if you are faced with
a stop sign, but other traffic is not, you may
proceed only after stopping and yielding the
right-of-way to any other vehicle or pedes­
trian either in the intersection, or so dose to
the intersection as to make it dangerous to
travel through the intersection;
• At intersections where there are no stop
signs, yield signs or other traffic signals, if
two vehicles come to the intersection at the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left must yield to the driver of the vehicle
on the right;
• At a four-way intersection where all drivers
are faced with stop signs, all drivers must
yield to pedestrians; otherwise the vehicles
should proceed through the intersection in a
"first to arrive, first to proceed order." If two
vehicles reach the intersection at approxi­
mately the same time, yield to any vehicles
on your right.
Important points to remember: 
- Take your tum when it comes if it is
safe to do so; do not unnecessarily de­
lay traffic;
- If another driver tries to take your turn,
even if you have the right-of-way, let the 
other driver proceed. It might prevent
a traffic crash;
- Care, courtesy and common sense
should govern your actions.
• When making a left turn at an intersection,
or into an alley or driveway, yield the right­
of-way to all traffic coming from the opposite
direction;
• When approaching a yield sign, slow down
to a safe speed and be prepared to stop. If
necessary, stop and only proceed when it is
safe to do so; 
• When the roadway you are traveling on is
merging into other traffic without stopping,
adjust your speed and vehicle position to
allow you to merge into the new lane safely.
If traffic from another roadway is merging
into the roadway you are traveling on, safely
change lanes away from the merging traffic if 
possible. If it is not possible to change lanes
away from the merging traffic, adjust your
speed and vehicle position to safely allow
the traffic to merge;
• At intersections with traffic control lights,
wait until the intersection is dear of traffic
or approaching traffic before entering. Do not
proceed "just because" you have the green
light;
• [f you are about to enter or cross a highway
from an alley, private road or highway, you
must stop and yield the right-of-way to all
other pedestrians and vehicles already trav­
eling on the roadway or sidewalk you are
entering or crossing;
• If emergency vehicles are using their emer­
gency lights (blue or red) and sirens, safely
maneuver your vehicle out of their way.You
should slow your vehicle and move over to 
the shoulder of the road, or if that is not pos­
sible, as far to the right of the roadway or lane
as you can, and stop. You should always use
caution to ensure that you do not endanger
other motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians
while doing so. Do not position your vehicle
so that it blocks an intersection or otherwise
prevents the emergency vehicle from making
a necessary turn;
• Yield to all highway maintenance vehicles
and workers in a construction zone;
• Unless a sign posted at that intersection pro­
htbits doing so, it is permissible to make a
"right turn on red" at an intersection con-
Texting/Cell Phones Passing Mail Carriers........ 25
/

SECTION 5: TRAFFIC LAWS ---
trolled by a traffic control light You may 
proceed only after making a complete stop, 
yielding to all traffic and pedestrians, and 
making the determination that you can safely 
complete the tum; 
• Unless a sign posted at that intersection pro­
hibits doing so, it is permissible to make a
"left turn on red" from the left lane of a one-­
way street onto a one-way street on which
the traffic moves toward the driver's left. You
may proceed only after making a complete
stop, yielding to all traffic and stopping for
pedestrians, and making the determination
that you can safely complete the turn; 
• When a school bus is preparing to stop to
load or unload children, the driver of the bus
will activate flashing yellow lights. When
these flashing yellow lights are activated, all
drivers approaching the school bus should
slow down and be prepared to stop. All
drivers should pay special attention to chil­
dren who may be walking along or crossing
the roadway. Once the flashing lights have
turned red and the stop signs have extended
from the side of the bus, it is unlawful for any
vehicle to pass the stopped school bus while
it is loading or unloading passengers. On a
highway divided by a median, cars traveling 
on the opposite side from the stopped school 
bus are not required to top, however drivers 
should remain attentive for children walking 
along or crossing the roadway. 
Passing 
How To Pass On A Two-Lane Road 
• Wait for a passing zone to begin. A passing
zone is indicated by striped lines to the right
of the center line of the roadway. If the line
nearest your vehicle is solid, you are not in a
passing zone. Look ahead along the roadway
to determine the length of the passing zone
and if there is traffic approaching from the op­
posite direction.You must have sufficient time
and space to execute your passing maneuver
and return your vehicle completely to the
right lane before the passing zone ends, before
entering an intersection, and before oncom­
ing traffic is within 200 feet of your vehicle;
• Before leaving your lane to begin passing,
check your rear view and side mirrors, and 
turn your head and look back to check your
THE MOVE OVER'' LAW 
"blind spot." Be certain that no one is pass­
ing you; 
• Activate your left turn signal as you begin
passing;
• Pass on the left and do not return to the right
lane until your vehicle is safely clear of the 
overtaken vehicle. Wait until you can see the
car you have just passed in your rear view
mirror;
• Activate your right turn signal before return­
ing to the right lane. Be sure to tum your signal
off once you have returned to the right lane.
Passing is prohibited 
on two-lane roads: 
• In area marked by a solid yellow line on the
right of the center line, or a "Do ot Pass"
sign, or double yellow lines;
• Within 100 feet of a railroad crossing;
• Within 100 feet of a bridge, viaduct or tunnel;
• When a car approaching from the oppo ite
direction makes passing unsafe or will be 
All 50 States have 'Move OVer" laws to protect law enforcement officers and other workers stopped on our nation's roads. Georgia's "Move OVer" 
Law helps ensure highway safety for motorists, emergency personnel, active sanitation workers, and utility service wori<ers. when their vehicles are 
stopped on the side of the roadway. 
This law was created to reduce the number of injuries and fatalities to police officers, paramedics, firefighters, wrecker operators, and highway 
construction workers by maintaining an open buffer lane between passing highway traffic and authorized roadside emergency vehicles displaying 
flashing yellow, amber, white, red, or blue lights. It was amended to include active sanitation workers and utility service workers who are utilizing 
traffic cones and/or vehicles displaying flashing lights. 
, .... 
In Georgia, this law requires motorists to: 
• Move over to the next lane if safely possible.
• If unable to move over, then slow down below the speed limit and be prepared to stop.
This law applies to any emergency, sanitation, or utility service vehicle parked on the shoulder of the roadway. 
Why was the "Move Over" Law Passed? 
• It saves lives. The "Move Over'' Law helps
maintain traffic flow and protect the safety
of motorists, emergency personnel, active
sanitation workers, and utility service
workers.
• Vehicles parked on the side of the
roadway are vulnerable to crashes even
when emergency lights are flashing.
• More police officers are killed by traffic
crashes than in any other line-of-duty
cause of death. More than one fourth of
those killed are struck by passing vehicles
while they work outside their patrol cars.
How does the "Move Over" 
Law make a difference? 
• Thirty percent of all crashes occur as the
result of another crash.
• Providing a buffer lane for these vehicles
when parked on the roadway shoulder
actually reduces the risk of another crash.
• When the required clearance is given to
these types of vehicles, the margin of
safety is increased, not only for public
safety, emergency personnel, active
sanitation workers, and utility service
workers, but for motorists and their
passengers as well.
It's the Law! 
• Violations can result in a fine of no more
than $500 for the first offense.
• The "Move Over" Law is another reason
to slow down on the highways and
interstates.
18 
f l
► 
Safely change lanes 
when approaching any 
emergency, sanitation, 
or utility service vehicle. 

--sECTION 5: TRAFFIC LAWS
within 200 feet of your vehicle prior to the 
completion of a passing maneuver; 
• On a hill or curve where it is not possible to
see oncoming vehicles which might be close
enough to be a hazard;
• On the shoulder of the road;
• When a school bus is stopped to load or un­
load passengers.
Passing is Permitted When: 
• Lawfully overtaking and passing another
vehicle going in the same direction;
• An obstruction makes it necessary to drive
to the left of the center line, but only after
yielding to oncoming traffic;
• A roadway includes two or more marked
lanes in the same direction;
• A roadway with more than one lane is re­
stricted to one-way traffic. Upon a multi-lane,
two way highway, you must never drive to 
the left of the center line except when au­
thorized to do so by traffic control signals
or signs or when making a left turn into an
alley, private road or driveway.
Passing On The Right 
You may pass on the right of another vehicle 
which is making or about to make a left tum if 
there is sufficient µivement width k>r both }OU r 
vehicle and the vehicle making the left turn. 
You may also pass on the right when traveling 
on a multi-lane highway carrying two or more 
lanes of traffic in the same direction. 
When Someone Passes You 
When a driver behind you is overtaking 
your vehicle, be alert for any unsafe actions 
by the other driver. lt is considered courteous 
to reduce your speed slightly, making it easier 
for the other vehicle to pass you. It is unlawful 
to increase your speed before you have been 
passed completely by the overtaking vehicle. 
Passing Stopped Cars 
Whenever any vehicle is stopped to permit 
a pedestrian to cross the roadway at a marked 
crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswall< at 
an intersection, the driver of any other vehicle 
approaching from the rear shall not overtake 
and pass the stopped vehicle. When stopping 
to allow a pedestrian to cross in front of you, 
leave sufficient room between your vehicle and 
the crosswall< so that approaching traffic can 
see the entirety of the crosswalk. 
Slow down and prepare to stop if you are ap­
proaching an intersection where other vehicles 
are stopped, even though the traffic control de­
vices indicate they are authorized to proceed. 
If they are stopped because they are allowing 
a pedestrian to cross the roadway, their vehicle may 
block your view of the pedestrian. 
Passing Bicycles 
Motorists should approach bicycles with 
due caution and shall proceed as follows: 
(Violation is a misdemeanor punishable by a 
tine up to $250.00). 
Make a lane change into a lane not adjacent 
to the bicycle if possible in the existing road 
and traffic conditions OR 
If a lane change is impossible, prohibited 
by law, or unsafe, reduce the speed of the 
motor vehicle to a reasonable and proper 
speed for the traffic conditions, which 
speed shall be at least ten miles per hour 
less than the posted speed limit or 25 
miles per hour, whichever is more and 
proceed around the bicycle with at least 
three feet between the vehicle and the 
bicycle at all times. 
Passing Motorcyclists 
A motorcyclist legally occupies the full width 
of a single lane when traveling. When passing a 
motorcyclist, a driver must pass in an adjacent 
lane. Drivers are not permitted to occupy the 
same lane as a motorcyclist while passing them. 
Weaving 
It is unlawful to weave from one lane of traf­
fic to another in order to move faster than the 
flow of traffic. A motorist may change lanes on 
a multi-lane highway and pass slower moving 
vehicles only when it is safe to do so. A driver's 
signaling to change lanes should be clearly in­
dicated so as to warn vehicles of the movement. 
Turn Signals and 
Making Turns Safely 
Turn movements by motor vehicles are regu­
lated by law, and failure to observe or comply is 
a violation. Drivers must know and understand 
the law in order to tum safely and avoid crashes. 
STOP 
RIGHT TURN 
A turn signal must be given whenever a tum 
is made to the right or the left You must give a 
continuous tum signal for an adequate distance 
to alert other drivers before turning. Never de­
cide to make a tum at the "last minute." Turning 
quickly or erratically can be dangerous to you 
and other drivers. 
Illegal Signals 
It is against the law to flash tum signals as 
a courtesy or "do pass" signal to other drivers 
in the rear. 
How To Make A Right Turn 
• Usingappropriatesignals,and giving drivers
ahead of and behind you adequate notice,
activate your right turn signal;
• Approach the intersection in the right lane,
staying as close as practicable to the curb or
edge of the roadway;
• lf there is a bicycle lane on the road on which
you are traveling, you must yield to bicyclists
traveling straight through the intersection
before making a right tum;
• Make the tum in such a way as to end up in
the right lane of the street into which you
have turned and avoid entering any other
lane of traffic. If there are multiple turning
Janes on the street you are tu ming from,com­
plete the turn so that your vehicle ends up
in the corresponding lane on the street you
are turning onto.
How To Make A Left Turn 
• Using appropriatesignals,and giving drivers
ahead of and behind you adequate notice,
activate your left turn signal;
• Move into the far left lane of the direction in
which you are traveling, or into the turning
lane if one is provided;
• Keep your wheels straight until you begin
making the turn;
• Yield the right-of-way to aJI vehicles, includ­
ing bicycles, which are approaching from the
opposite direction, and pedestrians crossing
either roadway;
• When safe to do so, and when traffic signals/
signs permit, make your turn so that your ve­
hicle ends up in the lane closest to the center
lane(s) in your direction of traffic on the street
you tu med onto, or closest to the center Ii ne
if there is no center lane;
• lf there arc multiple turning lanes on the
street you are turning from, complete the
turn so that your vehicle ends up in the cor­
responding lane on the street you are tum­
ing onto;
• Once you have entered an intersection to
make a left tum, you cannot change lanes
in the intersection;
• You must stop and remain stopped for any
pedestrians in the crosswalk of the road you
are turning onto until they have cleared the
lanes of traffic that you are traveling on.

Watching for Pedestrians 
When Making Turns 
At most intersections where there is a pe­
destrian signal, the "Walle" signal of the cross­
ing street corresponds to the green light of the 
roadway you are traveling on. This means that 
when you are authorized to tum, pedestrians 
are authorized to cross the street onto which you 
are turning at the same time. Therefore, before 
making your tum, you must stop and remain 
stopped for any pedestrians in the crosswallc 
of the road onto which you wish to turn until 
they have cleared the lanes of traffic upon which 
you are traveling. 
.---
U-Turns
Do not make a U-turn on a curve or near the
top ofa hill iJ you cannot be seen by other d riv­
er approaching from either direction. Do not 
make a U-tum where signs prohibit doing so. 
Making Tums on 
Multi-Lane Highways 
On a multi-lane, two-way highway, you must 
never drive to the left of the center line except 
when making a left tum. If traffi wntrol · gnals 
or igns are present, you may only complete 
the tum when authorized to do so by the traf­
fic c ontrol signalsor signs. When m aking left 
turns, you must always yield to oncoming traf­
fic, and wait for pedestrians t o  clear the lanes 
of traffic, driveway, idewalk, or alley you a re 
turning into. 
StoppingJ Standing, 
and Partiing 
I t  is against the law to park on a highway. If 
the vehicle is disabled, you should make every 
practical effort to park off the highway, leaving 
free passage and a clear view of your vehicle for 
200 feet in each direction. 
Stopping, Standing or Parking is not 
permitted under the following conditions 
at any time: 
• On the street side of any parked vehicle; 
• On a sidewallc; 
• Within an intersection;
• On a crosswallc; 
• Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb; 
• Alongside or opposite any street excavation 
or obstruction when stopping, standing, or 
parking would obstruct traffic; 
• Upon a bridge or overpass, or within a high­
way tunnel; 
• On any railroad tracks; 
• On a controlled access roadway; 
SECTION 5: TRAFFIC LAWS -
• In the area between roadways on a divided 
highway, including crossovers; 
• At any place marked by a no-parking sign. 
Stopping, Standing or Parking is permit­
ted only momentarily to pick up or drop off 
passengers under the following conditions: 
• In front of a public or private driveway; 
• Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
• Within 20 feet of a crosswallc at an intersec­
tion; 
• Within 30 feet of a stop sign, yield sign, or
traffic control signal;
• Within 20 feet of a fire station driveway;
• Within 75 feet of the spot across the street
from a fire station driveway;
• Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing; 
• At any place where official signs prohibit
standing. 
Steps to Parallel Parking 
When attempting to parallel park, drive past 
the parking space you wish to use and stop 
when you are approximately even with the 
car ahead of the pace (you should be approxi­
mately 2 feet from the other car-door to door). 
Wheel 
:A.li nment 
Parallel Parking Diagram 
KEEP AIGHJ; EXCEPT TO PASS 
The "Slow Poke" Law (House Bill 459) 
Slower drivers must move out of the passing lane (most left-hand lanes) and over to 
the right to allow faster-moving traffic to proceed. Regardless of the speed you are 
traveling, you must move from the lane when faster traffic is approaching. The only 
exceptions are: 
• When traffic conditions make it necessary 
to drive in the passing lane; 
• When inclement weather, obstructions, or
hazards make it necessary to drive in the 
passing lane; 
• When compliance with a law of this state 
or with an official traffic control device 
makes it necessary to drive in the passing 
lane;
IT'S THE LAW! 
• When your vehicle must be driven in the 
passing lane to exit or turn left; 
• When it is necessary to pay a toll or use a 
pass on toll highways; 
• Authorized emergency vehicles engaged 
in official duties; or
• Vehicles engaged in highway maintenance
and construction operations.
20 
f l 
►

-
SECTION 5: TRAFFIC LAWS
• Turn your wheels sharply to the right and
back slowly toward the car behind the space
you wish to use;
• As your front door passes the back bumper
of the car ahead of the space you wish to use,
quickly straighten your wheels and continue
to back diagonally into the space in a straight
line;
• When your front bumper is completely clear
of the car ahead of you, turn your wheels
sharply to the left and back slowly toward
the car behind you;
• Stop before making contact with the car be­
hind you. Place the car in drive, tum your
wheels sharply to the right and pull toward
the center of the parking space;
• Always give the appropriate tum signal prior 
to beginning your parking maneuver and
when you exit from a parallel parking space.
Backing Up 
• Before backing, check all sides of your vehicle
to make sure it is safe to do so. You should
turn your head and look over your right
shoulder while backing; do not depend on
your mirrors;
• For buses and large vehicles, the driver
should use all mirrors and utilize a reliable
person to observe and direct while backing
the vehicle.
Traveling Speed 
Super Speeder 
Any driver convicted of speeding 75 mph or 
more on a two-Jane road or 8.5 miles per how· or 
more on any road in Georgia, will be assessed 
a $200 state fee. The state fee will be in addition 
to any local fines imposed in the jurisdiction 
where the speeding offense occurs. Failure to 
pay the tatc fee on time will result in a license 
suspension and additional $50 reinstatement fee. 
Speed Limits 
Maximum traveling peecls are determinecl 
based on the following general rules in Georgia 
unless otherwise posted: 
• 30 miles per hour in any urban or re idential
district;
• 35 miles per hour on an unpaved county road; 
• 70 miles per hour on a rural interstate;
• 65 miles per hour on an urban interstate or
on a multi-lane dividecl highway;
• 55 miles per hour in all other areas.
These are only general rules. Local jurisdic­
tions, the Georgia Department of Transporta­
tion, or th Georgia Department of Public Safety 
may deem it necessary to adjust speed limits 
based on local conditions, whether temporary 
or permanent. 
Always watch for speed limit signs 
while driving . Some areas, such as 
school zones or construction zones may be 
posted for lower maximum speed limits 
at certain 
times of the day or for a short period of time. 
It is important to pay close attention to road 
signs while driving to ensure that when you 
approach a speed zone, whether temporary 
or permanent, you will have sufficient time to 
adjust your speecl accordingly. 
Driving Too Slowly 
Drivers are prohibited from driving a mo­
tor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede 
the normal and reasonable movement of traf­
fic e xcept w hen a r ecluced s peecl is necessary 
for safe operation. On road with two or more 
lanes, drivers cannot continue to operate a mo­
tor vehicle in the passing lane if that driver is 
being overtaken by a motor vehicle traveling at 
a higher rate of speed from behind. Penalties 
include fine up t o  $1000 a nd/or 3 p oints on 
the driving record. 
When there are two or more lanes for traffic 
moving in the same direction, slower vehicles 
should use the right lane except when pass­ 
ing or making a left turn. Driving too slowly is 
dangerous because it impecles the regular flow 
of traffic. Minimum speed limits are posted on 
certain highways. rf you are unable to drive at 
the minimum speed, you should seek an al­
ternate route. 
Railroad Crossings 
You must always stop within 50 feet, but not 
less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail of a rail­
road crossing when any of the following apply: 
• The signal is flashing;
• The crossing gates are lowered;
• A flagman is giving a signal;
• A train is approaching so closely as to create
an immediate hazard;
• A train gives a warning signal and is an im­
mediate hazard due to its speed or nearness
to the crossing;
• A stop sign is posted.
Under no circumstances should a motorist
drive through, around or under any crossing 
gate while the gate i lowerecl. After topping, 
remain stopped until all tracks are clear, all 
railroad cro ing warning signals stop flash­
ing, the crossing gates are raised, and it is safe 
to proceed. 
7 Steps for Safety at Highway­
Rail Grade Crossings: 
1. Approach with care.
2. Prepare to stop.
3. Look both ways and listen carefully.
4. If it won't fit, don't commit. Do not enter
a cro sing unless you can drive completely
through without stopping!
5. Look again.
6. Cross tracks with care.
Z Keep going once you start. 
U your vehicle tall on the tra ks, do the 
following: 
• Get out immediately
• Move away
• Locate Emergency notification Systems (ENS) sign
containing emergency contact information.
• Call for help! Tell them a vehicle is on the tracks.

Highway Wortc Zones 
In an effort to minimize inconvenience, the 
Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) 
conducts most road construction and mainte­
nance μvithout dosing roads to traffic. This poses 
a traffic hazard fD drivers and their piSsengers, 
as well as the crew members working on the 
road. Over half of all fatal injuries to road 
wo:ckers are caused by being struck by a 
motor vehicle, and a third of these by vehicles 
intruding into the 
work 
space. 
Since 
1973, 
169 
GDOT workers have lost their 
lives in work zones. However, motorists are 
more likely to be killed or injured in work 
zone 
crashes 
than 
GDOT workers. The 
general public accounts for 82% of work zone 
fatalities nationwide. 
Highway work zones are defined as portions 
of a highway or street where construction, recon­
struction, or maintenance work is being done to 
the road, its shoulders, or any other areas near 
the roadway. This definition also includes mobile 
work such as underground and overhead utility 
maintenance, snow removal, and land survey­
ing activities. Highway work zones are set up 
according to the type of road and the work to be 
done on the road. Signing, roadway markings, 
and flaggers are used to direct drivers safely 
through work zones or carefully ma:cked detours. 
Motorists are responsible for knowing how to 
read and react to these directions. Paying atten­
tion and driving cautiously and courteously are 
the most important steps to preventing crashes 
while driving through a work zone. Watch for 
the color orange. It means road work 
Obey the Signs 
Warning signs in work zones have an orange 
background and black letters or symbols. They 
are used with other traffic control devices or 
flaggers to help direct traffic safely through 
work areas and to protect drivers, their pas­
sengers, and highway workers. 
Reduce Your Speed 
For safety reasons, the speed limit in most work 
zones is reduced. If the speed limit is not reduced 
in a work zone, drivers should obey the normal 
posted speed limit for the road on which they arc 
traveling, but be more cautious of road conditions, 
lane position, and the presence of workers. 
Advisory speed limits are used to identify safe 
speeds for specific conditions wi thin a work wne. 
These black and orange signs are always used 
with warning signs. Official speed limit reduction 
requirements will be indicated with the standard 
black and white speed limit signs. Motorists who 
disobey regulatory speed limits i n  a work zone 
may be found guilty of a misdemeanor of a high 
and aggravated nature and will be punished 
by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than 
$2,000.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to 
exceed 12 months, or both 
Obey Flaggers 
Flaggers are people used to direct traffic 
through and around work zones. 1n a work zone, 
a flagger has the same authoiity as a regulatory 
sign. Do not disobey a flagger's traffi control 
directions. 
SECTION 5: n:IAFFIC LAWS -
Yield to Amber Lights in Work Zones 
Work vehicles and heavy equipment will 
typically have flashing or revolving amber 
lights.You must yield the right-of-way to these 
vehicles. Reduce your speed as you approach 
any work zone where vehicles have amber 
lights displayed. 
Adjust Your Lane Position 
Travel lanes are likely to be dosed in work 
zones, and lane patterns may change as the work 
progresses. Sometimes, workers must operate 
within inches or feet of an open lane of traffic. 
When lanes are dosed or narrowed, or work­
ers are operating on the roadway near traffic, 
change lanes away from them if possible or shift 
slightly v.rithin the boundaries of your lane to 
give added distance between your vehicle and 
the workers. This will provide extra protection 
for you, your passengers and the workers along 
the roa:iway. 
Yield to Mobile Work Vehicles 
Some road work can be performed without 
actually dosing lanes of travel. Pavement main­
tenance, debris removal, paint striping, utility 
work, and snow removal are examples of work 
accomplished while moving in traffic. Vehicles 
used in performing this type of wo:ck will have 
flashing amber lights and may have flashing ar­
rows directing traffic to merge left or right. The 
vehicles may also display signs for the purpose 
of directing traffic or indicating hazardous condi­
tions. 
These vehicles usually work at very slow 
speeds, such as 5 miles per hour, and may 
oc asionally be stationary in the road way. 
For your safety, and the safety of others, slow 
down, yield the right-0f-way to these work 
vehicles, and follow any directions displayed 
by the work vehicles. 
IWIINIMUM 
flNE 
100 
Common signs seen in and around work zones cautioning drivers. 
WORK ZONE DRIVING TIPS 
When you travel through a work zone, 
remember these four tips: 
1. Reduce your speed. 
2. Watch for speed limit signs. Fines are Increased In most 
work zones. 
3. Adjust your lane position away from workers. 
4. Prepare for the unexpected! 
DO YOUR PART TO HELP PROTECT THE MEN AND 
WOMEN WHO WORK HARD TO MAKE GEORGIA 
ROADS AMONG THE BEST IN THE NATION. 
22 
fl 
► 

-
SECTION 5: TRAFFIC LAWS
Other Laws 
Controlled-Access Roadways 
• You are prohibited from entering or leaving 
any controlled-access roadway at unauthor­
ized entrances or exits; 
• Certain types of vehicles may be prohibited 
on controlled-access roadways if signs are 
posted to this effect; 
• Backing up is prohibited on controlled­
access roadways. 
• An example of a controlled-access roadway 
includes any tolled facility in Georgia such 
as the I-85 Express Lanes or the reversible 
I-75 Express Lanes. Tolled lanes in Geor­
gia require motorists to mount a registered 
Peach Pass transponder in their vehicle in 
order to access the lanes. Peach Pass can
also be used in Florida and 
orth Carolina. 
Registered owners of the vehicle that enters 
the tolled lane without an active Peach Pass 
will receive a violation notice in the mail. 
• You are prohibited from entering the revers­
ible Express Lanes when the access control 
gates are closed or closing. 
Coasting 
The driver of any motor vehicle, when trav­
eling down a hill,must not coast with the gears 
or transmission of the vehicle in neutral. 
Driving Under the Influence 
of Drugs or Alcohol 
• It is unlawful for any person to operate a 
motor vehicle while under the in£luence of 
alcohol, a drug (prescription or illegal), or 
any other substance which impairs his/her 
ability to safely do so; 
• A person 21 or more years of age is consid­
ered "Under the Influence of Alcohol" when 
0.08 gm or more by alcohol weight is present 
in the blood; 
• A person under 21 years ofage is irrefutably 
considered "Under the Influence of Alcohol" 
when 0.02 gm or more by alcohol weight is 
present in the blood; 
Certain drugs or other substances can also 
make a person irr futably "under the influ­
ence." Having a prescription for certain medi­
cation is not a defense if the medication impairs 
your ability to safely operate a motor vehicle. 
Penalties for driving under the influence o f  
intoxicants are severe, with fines u p  to $1000, 
jail sentences up to 12 months, and mandatory 
uspension of your driving privileges. 
Reckless Driving 
Reckless driving is defined as driving any 
vehicle in reckless disregard for the safety 
of persons or property. Examples of reckless 
driving include but are not limited to speed­
ing, weaving in and out of traffic, improperly 
passing, etc. Penalties for reckless driving can 
include a fine ci up to $1000, imprisonment for 
up to 12 months, and, if the driver is under 21 
years of age, conviction will result in a suspen­
sion of aJ1 driving privileges. 
Racing 
The following behaviors are considered rac­
ing on highways and streets: 
• When two or more people compete or race 
on any street or highway; 
• When one motor vehicle is beside or to the 
rear of another driver, and one driver tries to 
prevent the passing or overtaking of the com­
peting driver by acceleration or maneuver; or 
• When one or more persons compete in a 
race against time. 
Aggressive Driving 
•
A 
person 
commits 
the offense 
of 
aggressive driving when he or she 
operates any motor vehicle with the 
intent 
to 
annoy, 
harass, 
molest, 
intimidate, injure, or obstruct another 
person; 
• Examples of aggressive driving include 
but are not limited to tailgating, cutting in 
front of another driver, blocking other 
drivers from passing or changing lanes, 
etc. 
• 
A conviction for aggressive driving is 
considered a misdemeanor of a high and 
aggravated 
nature; 
The 
penalty 
for 
committing this violation may include 
imprisonment, fines, and, if the driver is
under 21 years of age, conviction will 
result in a suspension of all driving 
privileges. 
Drag Racing/Reckless Stunt Driving 
"Reckless Stunt Driving" is operating "any 
vehicle while drag racing, in violation of Code 
Section 40-6-186, or laying drags, in violation 
of Code Section 40-6-251, in reckless disregard 
for the safety of persons on a highway or upon 
private property without express 
authorization from the owner of such 
property." 
Penalties: 
1st Conviction within 5 years 
• 12-month suspension 
•Eligible for early reinstatement at the end of 120 
days 
.Restoration Fee $210/$200 by mail 
•Limited Permit Available 
2nd Conviction within 5 years 
•3-ycar suspension 
•Eligible for early reinstatement after 18 
months from the date of conviction 
•Restoration Fee $310/$300 by mail 
.Limited Permit Available 
3rd and Subsequent Conviction Within 5 years 
•Habitual Violator (HY) Revocation 
•No Limited Permit Available 
.May apply for a probationary license per 
O.C.G.A. § 40-5-58 
Trucks and Vehicles Pulling Trailers 
When traveling upon a roadway outside 
of a business or residential district, drivers of 
trucks and vehicles pulling trailers must le.ave 
sufficient space between themselves and other 
vehicles of the same kind, so that the driver of 
an overtaking vehicle can enter and occupy 
the space without danger. This law prohibits 
the act commonly known as "caravanning." 
Trailers wider than 8 feet, 6 inches are not 
permitted on Georgia's highways. 
Riding in Trailers 
Riding in a house trailer, or any other ve­
hicular drawn trailer, is not allowed while 
it is being moved upon a street or highway. 
There is a high likelihood of injury or death if 
passengers are unrestrained in the trailer and 
the vehide is involved in a crash or the trailer 
becomes disconnected from the vehicle. 
Median Strip 
lt is wtlawful to drive across a dividing sec­
tion, barrier, or unpaved strip which separates 
two roadways at any point other than at an 
authorized opening or crossover. 
Impaired Hearing and Vision 
It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle 
while wearing a headphone, headset, or any 
other device which would impair the driver's 
ability to hear. Also, the driver must not wear 
anything which would obstruct his or her vi­
sion while driving a motor vehicle. Not only is 
wearing these devices illegal, it is also unsafe. 
Obstructing the Driver's View 
If a vehicle is overloaded with passengers or 
freight so as to obstruct the view of the driver 
or interfere with the mechanical operation, 
it cannot be legally driven. Passengers must 
not ride in a position that interferes with the 
driver's view or his or her control of the vehicle. 
Opening Vehicle Doors 
Opening the doors of a vehicle on the side on 
which traffic is rroving is p-ohibited unless it 
is safe to do so and unless it can be done 
without interfering with the movement of 
other traffic, including bicyclists that may be 
operating close to the lane of parked cars. 
One Way Streets 
Unless directed to by a traffic control device, 
authorized emergency personnel or construc­
tion workers, it is unlawful for a vehicle to be 
driven contrary to the direction posted on a 
one-way street or highway, except in situations 
where police vehicles or authorized emergency 
vehicles find it necessary to do so. 
Stopping 
When stopping or slowing down suddenly, 
the proper hand, arm, or brake operated stop 
signal must be given. 

Use Headlights Properly 
Use high-beam headlights only when driv­
ing in rural areas and when other cars are not 
nearby. You must use your headlights between 
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour be­
fore sunrise; at any time when it is raining; or 
when visibility is limited. 
You should dim (lower) your headlights 
when: 
• You are within 500 feet of an approaching
vehicle so as not to blind the driver;
• You are following closely (within 200 feet) 
behind another vehicle;
• You are driving on lighted roads;
• You are driving in rain, fog, snow, or smoke;
• Your vision is reduced to less than 200 feet. 
Night Driving 
Because of decreased vision at night and the 
glare of oncoming headlights, night driving 
presents its own unique challenges. Unfamiliar 
roads and unexpected situations are more like­
ly to cause hazardous driving conditions. You 
can help ensure safe driving in several ways. 
• Make sure your headlights are working
properly and the lenses are kept clean. Pe­
riodically have them checked for correct
aim/alignment;
• Don't "overdrive" your headlights. When
traveling at night or in other situations
that make the use of headlights necessary
for safe travel, do not drive at a speed that
requires a stopping time greater than the
distance illuminated by your headlights; 
• Slow down when oncoming traffic is ap­
proaching or when you are nearing a curve; 
• If visibility is greatly reduced, use the edge 
line as a guide to maintaining your lane of
travel. If there is no edge line, use the center
line to guide yourself;
• Keep your windshield clean;
• Do not drive if you are tired. More frequent
stops, more fresh air, lively radio programs
and other measures can help you to avoid
drowsiness and inattention;
• Watch carefully for highway signs; they are
harder to see at night; 
• Watch carefully for pedestrians and for ve­
hicles stopped along the edge of the road;
• Do not stop on the roadway.
Safety Belts 
Georgia law states that each occupant in the 
front seat of a passenger vehicle traveling on 
Georgia roads and highways must be secured 
by a seat safety belt (lap and shoulder). All oc­
cupants of any passenger vehicle must utilize 
a seat safety belt if they are under the age of 18. 
Safety belts are needed because they are the 
most effective occupant protection in all types of 
vehicle crashes. According to Crash Stats from 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Admin­
istration, seat belts saved 12,802 lives in 2014. 
Georgia Department of Transportation reports 
that the risk of fatality in a crash is reduced 
by about 45% when scat belts arc used. U ing 
safety belts correctly is a preventable health 
care habit that: 
• helps you keep control of the vehicle; 
• helps keep your head from striking the dash 
or windshield; 
• helps keep people in the vehicle from hitting
each other; 
• helps spread the crash force across the stron­
ger parts of the body; 
• helps protect you from injury;
• helps keep you from being ejected from the 
vehicle. 
When used correctly, safety belts are effective 
at helping reduce the risk of death or serious 
GEORGIA'S UI IER CONTROi. LAW 
lllJtllY· Georgia has a "primary" safety belt 
law, meaning that officers may stop and cite 
violators without observing another violation. 
Safety Restraints for Children 
Every driver transporting a child who is 
under eight years of age, except in a taxi.cab 
or public transit vehicle, must properly re-­
strain the child in a child passenger restrain­
ing system appropriate for the child's height 
and weight. The restraint system must com­
ply with the United States Department of 
Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard 213. Under limited circumstances, 
a child under eight may be exempt from this 
requirement. For further information, contact 
the Governor's Office of Highway Safety 
http://www.gahighwaysafety.org. 
Distracted Driving 
Distracted driving is one of the fastest growing 
safety 
issues. 
According 
to 
the 
ational Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA), 3,142 people were killed on U.S. 
roadways in 2019 because of distracted drivers. 
Distracted driving is doing another activity while 
driving. This takes the driver's attention away 
from 
the 
primary 
task 
of driving 
and 
increases 
the 
risk 
of 
crashing. Common 
distractions include but are not limited to 
talking on a cell phone, texting, 
reading, 
eating, grooming, using a navi-gation device, and 
adjusting the stereo system. The presence of 
a passengers and pets can also increase crash 
risk. Georgia law requires driv-ers to exercise due 
care in operating a motor vehicle and prohibits 
any action that distracts the driver from the 
safe operation of such vehicle. 
Following Emergency Vehicles 
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on 
official business, must not follow any fire fighting 
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or 
other emergency vehicles, closer than 200 feet, or 
park any vehicle within 500 feet of any fire 
apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm 
Each year, municipal, county and state government agencies spend 
thousands of dollars to clean up litter from the streets and highways 
of Georgi.a. Individuals who litter cause harm to the beauty of the state 
and impact the health,. welfare and safety of others. 
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, or dropped from any motor 
vehicle, the operator of the vehicle shall have violated the Litter 
Control Law. All Georgi.a law enforcement agencies are authorized to 
enforce compliance of the Litter Control Law. 
It is unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave litter on any 
public or private property in the State of Georgia, or any waters in the 
State of Georgia. 
• "Litter'' means all sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, rubbish, waste
material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, dead animals or 
discarded materials of every kind and description;
• "Public or private property" means the right-of-way of any road 
or highway, any body of water or watercourse of the shores or 
beaches thereof, any park, playground, building refuge 
or conservation or recreation area and residential or farm 
properties, timberlands or forest.
Georgia's Litter Control Law classifies littering as damage to property. 
A conviction under this law is considered a misdemeanor in Georgia. 
Persons convicted of this law may be assessed a fine up to $1000 
and a 12 month jail term. In addition, if convicted of littering, a judge 
could order the convicted person to pi.ck up and remove litter from 
any designated area. 
LITTER. b 
. ͆ . 
' ' . ' 
l -i_: _, - __ , .. ,_. · 
I 
i I ' r • 
' ' • 
,• 
• : ' r  i 
24 
f L 
►

===================SECTJON5 Traffic Laws 
TEX.TING & CELL PHONES 
Textlng and Cell Phone 
Use While Driving 
Georgia has a hands Free Law (HB 
673) that mandates that drivers are
not allowed to hold or support a phone
for any reason. A phone can only be
used with headphones, a wireless
device, phone holder or mounted
device. Penalties are fines and
points added to your driving record
increasing for each conviction.
UDRIVE. 
UTEXT. 
Hands Free Georgia Law {HB 673) 
Pursuant to 40-6-241 (c), passed in 2018, all drivers operating a motor vehicle 
on any highway of this state. Holding or supporting, with any part of the body, 
a wireless telecommunications device or stand-alone electronic device. 
•
Writing, sending or reading any text-based communication, including a
text message, instant message, e-mail or internet data.
•
Watching, recording, or broadcasting a video or movie.
Penalties 
•
1st conviction - 1 point and fine not more than $50.00
•
2nd conviction - 2 points and fine not more than $100.00
•
3rd or more convictions - 3 points and fine nor more than $150.00
Passing a Postal Carrier or Sanitation Workers
The operator of a motor vehicle 
approaching a postal service vehicle or a 
vehicle with active sanitation workers that is 
displaying flashing yellow, amber, white, or 
red lights shall approach the vehicle with 
due caution and shall (unless directed by a 
peace officer) proceed as follows: 
•Make a lane change into a lane not
adjacent to the vehicle if possible in the
existing safety and traffic conditions; or
•If a lane change would be impossible, prohibited
by law, or unsafe, reduce the speed of the motor
vehicle to a reasonable and  proper speed for the
existing road and traffic conditions, which speed
shall be at least ten miles per hour less than the
posted speed limit or 25 miles per hour, whichever
is more,  and be prepared to stop.
•Violation of subsection (b) of this Code section
shall be punished by a fine of not more 71 than
$250.00.

0 =@uiEllJ@ 
TEENDRWING 
LAWS 
This Section Covers 
School Enrollment Requirements ..................... .26 
Joshua's Law ....................................................... 26 
Class C Instructional Pennit (CP) ....................... 26 
Class D Provisional License ........................... 27 
Teens Moving to Georgia ............................... 27 
Revocation of Minor's Ucense/Permit ............. .27 
License/Permit Suspensions ............................. 27 
Suspension of Driver's License/Permit 
or Driving Privileges .............................................. 27 
Convictions Other Than DUI .................................. .27 
Convictions for Driving Under the 
Influence of Drugs or Alcohol (DUQ ....................... 27 
In 1997 The Teenage and Driver Responsibilit) 
Act (TADRA) established a graduated driver's 
licensing program for teens ages 15 to 18 in 
Georgia. 
This means that teens progress 
through a licensing process in three phases. 
As teens reach a certain age, complete certain 
requirements and have demonstrated their 
ability to safely operate a motor vehicle, they 
are allowed to progress to the next phase. 
Successful progression to the next phase also 
requires a demonstration of reponsibility on 
the part of the teen by avoiding any violations 
during the term of the license held. TADRA 
Responsible Adult Requirements 
All applicants under 18 years of age must 
have a responsible adult present to sign the ap­
plication and complete the Responsible Adult 
Affidavit. A responsible adult is a person who 
is eighteen (18) years of age or older, 
competent to verify the application, and has 
personal knowledge of the applicant. He or 
she may be: 
•
A parent or legal guardian of the
applicant 
(must provide school or 
military documents, tax information or a
driver's license/permit/ID card to show 
relationship to applicant), 
• A social worker who has worked with 
the 
applicant 
(must 
provide 
an 
employee ID or a letter from the state 
agency), 
•
Certified Driver Training instructor 
authorized to act on behalf of the 
parent, legal guardian or responsible 
adult of the applicant with notarized 
documentation to verify,
•
An employee of a homeless shelter 
where the applicant resides (must 
provide an employee ID or a letter from 
the shelter),
•
A stepparent of the applicant; 
• Other persons who can be identified
by a state agency or official, school 
official or certified school records, or 
documentation from a federal agency or 
entity. 
also includes school enrollment requirements 
Joshua's Law 
and license suspension/revocation provisions 
h 
. 
sec! 
dri . 
f 
d 
beh 
. 
( 
DUI, 
. 
Jos ua's Law promot 
mcrea 
teen 
vmg 
or 
angerous 
aviors e.g. 
excessive
fe. Th h. hi" h 
fJ h , La 
• cl d 
speeding, etc.) 
sa ty. 
e 1g 1gtso os ua s 
wm u e:
School Enrollment 
Requirements 
Anyone younger than 18 years of age must 
present one of the following in order to obtain a 
driver's license or instructional permit: 
l. Certificate of School Enrollment (DS-1-
obtained from school personnel);
2. High School Diploma; 
3. General Education Development (GED);
4. Special Diploma;
5. Certificate of High School Completion;
6. College or vocational school transcript dated
within the last thirty days (official transcript
with seal required);
7. Certificate of Adult Literacy proving pursuit 
of a GED (available from the Technical Col­
lege ystcm of Georgia for those currently
enroUed in a GED program);
8. Declaration ofinlent for Home Schoolers. 
Approved driver education training required 
to obtain a Gass D Provisional license at ages 16 
andl7; 
Approved driver education training required 
to obtain a Gass M Instructional Permit (MP) 
at age 16; 
You must be 17 years of age to obtain a Oass 
M Motorcycle Operator's License. 
The first stage of the graduated licensing 
program is a Class C Instructional Permit 
(CP). 
Class C Instructional Permit (CP) 
For first-time issuance of a Oass C 
In­structional Permit (CP), you must meet 
all requirements to obtain a Real DIJID if 
you have not already done so. See page 6 
for requirements. 
Obtaining a Class C 
Instructional Permit {CP) 
Upon 
reaching 
age 
15, 
or 
anytime 
thereafter, you may apply for a Cla 
Instructional Permit (CP). 
The 
following 
information will help you prepare for your 
visit to a DDS Customer Service Center: 
26 
f l 
► 
• You will be required to present documents 
verifying your identity, U.S. citizenship or
lawful presence, and Georgia residency as
explained on pages 10-11;
• You must know your full Social Security
umber or provide proof of your ineligibility
to obtain a Social Security Number. See page
10 for a list of acceptable documents;
• If you are under age 18, you will be required
to present proof of school enrollment as
explained in this section;
• If you are under age 18, a parent, legal
guardian or responsible adult will have to
sign the application, thereby giving their
consent for you to obtain a permit. The
individual who signs your application may, 
for any reason, revoke your permit until you
reach the age of 18;
• You v.'ill be required to pass a vision test. 
Your eyes will be tested by means of a
mechanical device;
• You v.'ill be required to pass a knowledge
exam related to Road Signs and Road Rules.
Please refer to page 16 for more information
related to the knowledge exam;
• The test fee is $10.00 and must be paid prior
to testing. If any part of the test is failed, no
refund will be issued. The permit fee must be 
paid prior to every testing attempt.
Conditions of a Class C Instructional 
Permit {CP) 
•
Once issued a Oass C Instructional
Permit (CP), you may operate any 
Oass C vehicle when accompanied by
a person at least 21 years of age who
is licensed to drive a Class C vehicle,
who is fit and capable of exercising
control over the vehicle, and who is
occupying a seat beside the driver;
•
Oass C Instructional Permits (CP) are
valid for 2 years.

- SEC110N 6: TEEN DRIVING LAWS
Class D Provisional License 
For first-time issuance of a Class D License, you 
must meet all the requirements for a RealDU ID 
if you have not already done so. See pages 10-11 
for complete requirements. 
Obtaining a Class D Provisional License 
Upon reaching age 16 and after having hdd a valid 
instructional perit for one year and one day, you 
may apply for a Class D Provisional License by: 
• You must schedule a road test appointment (see
page 16).
• You must surrender your Class C Instruction-al
Pennit (CP) or affinn on your application that you
are unable to surrender the pcnnit Sec pages 19-20
for details concerning lost licenses and pcnnits;
• You will be required to present proof of school
enrollment as explained in this sec-lion;
• You must present proofof completion of the
Alcohol and Drug Awareness Program (ADAP).
This program is taught in most schools, and is also 
available on line. For information about ADAP, you 
may visit dds.georgia.gov;
• A parent, legal guardian or responsible adult will
have to sign the application, thereby giving their
consent for you to obtain a license. This person
may, for any reason, revoke your license until you
reach age 18.
• You must pass a road test designed to evaluate
your ability to safely operate a motor vehicle.
• You must satisfy the Driver Education/Joshua's
Law listed bdow. (Note: Teens with parents active
in the U.S. Military may use an out of state driver's
education certificate provided that it is within 9
months of their 16th birthday.
Driver Education Requirements 
• To obtain a Oass D license at the age of 16 or
17 you must complete a driver education course
approved by DDS. An approved driver
education course consists of: 
» either 30 hours of classroom instruction OR
completion of an equivalent online virtual
course;
AND
» 6 hours of on-the-road experience with a
certified instructor OR completion of the DDS
approved Parent/Teen Driver Guide;
» You must also have completed a cumulative
total of at least 40 hours of other driving 
experience including at least 6 hours at night. 
Completion of the DDS approved Parent/Teen 
Driving Guide will serve as an affidavit 
certifying that this requirement has been met; 
• If the teen obtains the on-the-road component
from a certified instructor, a separate document 
affirming that this requirement has been met must 
Conditions of a Class D 
Provisional License 
• A Class D license Holder may not drive be­
tween the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
-
0 EXCEPTIONS;
• During the first six months following is­
suance, only immediate family members
may ride in the vehicle. 'Immediate family
member' includes the driver's parents and
step-parents, grandparents, siblings and step­
siblings, children, and any other person who
resides at the driver's residence;
• During the second six months following is­
suance, only one passenger under 21 years
of age who is not a member of the driver's
immediate family may ride in the vehicle;
• After the first and second six-month periods,
only three passengers under 21 years of age
who are not members of the driver's immedi­
ate family may ride in the vehicle;
• A Class D license Holder must, for the 12
months preceding application for their Class
C license, be free from any convictions for
major traffic violations that result in the man­
datory suspension of a driver's license.
Teens Moving to Georgia 
The following information applies to teens 
moving to Georgia from another state who wish 
to obtain a driver's licen.se or permit in Georgia. 
Under Age 18 without a valid 
license issued by another state 
If you do not already hold a valid driver's 
license or instructional permit issued by an­
other state, you will be subject to the licensing 
requirements of Georgia residents. Please see 
the preceding sections for more information. 
Under Age 18 with valid 
out of state license 
If you hold a valid driver's license or instruc­
tional pennit issued by another state, you will 
normally be eligible to obtain a comparnble 
license issued by Georgia. However, the state 
of issuance may have requirements for teenage 
drivers that differ from Georgia. For more infor­
mation, please call the Customer Contact Center 
at (678) 4B-8400. 
be completed at the time of the road test. 
• 
• 
• 
• You must present proof of completion of the Revocation of Mmor's License/ 
Alcohol and Drug Awareness Program (ADAP). Permit 
This program is taught in most schools, and is also 
available online. Foҋ information about ADAP, you 
The parent, legal guardian or responsible 
may vis1t dds.georg1a.gov; 
d It 
h 
· 
d 
· 
_, 
Ii 
· 
< 
Ex 
. 
a u w o s1gne a mmo1 s app cation 1or an 
•
ception
Anyl7-year-old is exempt from holding their 
Class CP/instructional permit for oneJear and
one day with proof that they are enliste in the 
military. They will be issued a Class C license 
afler successfully passing the road lcsL 
instructional permit or driver's license may re­
quest revocation of the license or permit at any 
time prior to the minor's eighteenth birthday. 
The person requesting revocation of a minor's 
instructional permit or driver's license must 
submit his or her request for the revocation on 
the form designated by the Department. The 
form requires the person's notarized signature. 
The person requesting revocation of a minor's 
instructional permit or driver's license must pay 
a non-refundable fee of $10.00. 
License/Permit Suspensions 
Convictions Other Than DUI 
The State of Georgia applies strict penalties to 
teens who fail to obey the laws regarding opera­
tion of a motor vehicle. The instructional pennit 
or driver's license of any person under21 years 
of age convicted of any of the following offenses 
shall be SUSPENDED for a period of six months 
for a first conviction, or for a period of twelve 
months for a second or subsequent conviction. 
• Hit and run or leaving the scene of a crash;
• Racing on highways or sh·eets;
• Using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting
to elude an officer;
• Reckless driving;
• Aggressive driving;
• Any other offense for which four or more
points arc assessed:
» Unlawful passing of a school bus;
» Improper passing on a hill or curve;
» Exceeding the speed limit by 24miles per 
hour or more. 
• The accumulation of four or more points in any 
12-month period while under 18 years of age. 
A limited permit may be available only if
the suspension resulted from a conviction for 
speeding 24-33 mph over the speed limit and 
the applicant is at least 18 years old. 
Convictions for Driving Under the 
Influence of Drugs or Alcohol (DUI) 
First DUI Suspension: 
• If your Blood Alcohol Concentration was .02
or greater, but less than .08; or yow· implied
consent test results were suppressed; or no
test was given, your I icense wi 11 be suspend­
ed for a minimum period of 6 months, wliess
you have a previous conviction for an offense
in the above list, in which case your license
will be suspended for a minimum period of
12 months;
• If your Blood Alcohol Concentration was .08
or greater or you refused implied consent
testing, your license will be suspended for a
minimum period of 12 months;
• No limited driving permit is available.
Second DUI Suspension: 
Your license will be suspended for a minimum 
period of18 months, with ignition interlock per­
mit eligibility after 120 days. 
f l 
► 
21 

-0 =0iilEll] za
SIGNS SIGNALS 
&MARKINGS 
This Section Covers 
RoadSigns ............................................................ 28 
Shapes of Signs .................................................. 28 
Regulatory Signs ................................................. 29 
Warning Signs ..................................................... 30 
Guide Signs ......................................................... 32 
Construction and Maintenance 
Warning Signs ..................................................... 33 
Service Signs ...................................................... 33 
Traffic Signals and Signs .................................... 34 
Lane Control Signals ............................................ 34 
Overhead Lane Signs .......................................... 34 
Pedestrian Signals .............................................. 34 
PHB/WALK Signal ............................................. 35 
Pavement Markings ............................................. 36 
stop Lines ........................................................... 36 
Crosswalk Lines .................................................. 36 
Railroad Crossings ............................................. 36 
Center Lines ....................................................... 36 
No Passing Lines ................................................ 36 
Edge Lines .......................................................... 36 
Lane Lines ........................................................... 36 
Traffic Striping .................................................... 36 
TlJTl IJre; . .. .. .. ... .. .. . . .. . .. . .. . . .. .. ... .. .. .. .... . ............. 37 
Bicycle Lanes ..................................................... 3 7 
Roundabouts ....................................................... 37 
It's the Law 
Georgia law requires that all drivers, including 
bicyclists, obey official highway signs and traf­
fic control signals unless otherwise directed by 
a police officer or emergency worker. 
Road Signs 
Shapes of Signs 
The State of Georgia uses seven basic shapes of signs to convey traf
fic control instructions. 
Drivers should know signs by their shapes and colors so that they may recognize them from a 
distance and begin reacting timely and appropriately. 
NO 
 
PARKING 
0 
PA\/EME T 
THRU 
TRAFFIC 
Vertical Rectangle 
signs are generally 
used for regulatory 
signs, which tell you 
what you must do. 
You must obey them 
in the same manner 
as traffic laws. 
Horizontal Rectangle 
signs are generally 
used as guide signs. 
They show locations, 
directions, or other 
special information. 
STOP 
Diamond shaped signs warn of existing or possible 
hazards on roadways or adjacent areas. They are 
yellow with black words indicating the potential 
hazard, or black symbols visually describing the 
potential hazard. 
An Octagon (eight-sided shape) always means 
A round sign means you are approaching a rail­
stop. When you come to it, you must make a com-
road crossing. This sign is posted a few hundred 
plete stop at a marked stop line. If there is no stop 
feet in front of the tracks and alerts you to slow 
line, stop before the crosswalk on your side of the 
down, look, listen and prepare to stop. If neces­
intersection. If there is no crosswalk, stop at a point 
sary, roll down a window and listen carefully for an 
from which you can best see oncoming traffic. 
approaching train. If a train is approaching, stop! 
You must not start again until all pedestrians have 
Do not try to calculate whether you can "make it" 
finished crossing on the side of the roadway you 
across the track. Never try to beat a train through 
are traveling on, and you have yielded the right-
the intersection. Passing is prohibited at all railroad 
of-way to closely approaching traffic. 
crossings. 
Triangle signs mean yield. You must slow down to 
a speed that is reasonable for existing conditions 
and stop if necessary. If you must stop, do so at 
a marked stop line, if it exists. After slowing or 
stopping, you must yield the right-of-way to other 
vehicles in the intersection or approaching closely 
on another roadway or auxiliary road leading into 
a major highway. 
Pentagon shaped signs mean you are approaching 
a school zone and/or school crossing. When used, 
they will be erected not less than 150 feet nor more 
than 700 feet in advance of the school grounds or 
school crossing. (These signs can sometimes be 
fluorescent green in color.) 

SECffON 7, SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS ---
Regulatory Signs 
Regulatory signs tell drivers what they may or may not do. Drivers, including bicyclists, must 
obey them in the same manner as traffic laws. Remember, a red circle with a red slash from upper 
left to lower right means" o." The picture within the circle shows what is prohibited. 
WRONG 
WAY 
I 
EDUCm 
SP D 
AHEAD 
SCHOOL 
SPEED 
LIM T 
20 
- You are approaching 
a one-way highway
or ramp. Driving on
the highway or ramp
in the direction you 
are traveling is not
allowed. 
You cannot turn 
around to go in the 
opposite direction at 
this intersection. 
You are approach­
ing an area where 
a reduced speed 
limit has been es­
tablished. 
You are approach­
ing a school zone. A 
reduced speed limit 
is in effect when the 
yellow lights are 
flashing. 
ON 
WAY 

NO KIGHT
TURN 
SLOWER 
TRAFFIC 
KEEP 
RIGHT 
SJ 
NO 
BICYCLES 
You may travel only 
in the direction of the 
arrow. 
You cannot make a 
right tum at this inter­
section. 
When two or more 
traveling lanes are 
available in the direc­
tion you are traveling, 
slower traffic should 
travel in the right 
(outside) lane(s). 
Bicycles are prohib­
ited from entering 
this roadway. 
KEEP 
RIGMT 
SP ED 
L MIT 
55 
NO RIGHT 
TURN 
ON RED 
AFTER 
STOP 
NO 
TRUCKS 
This marks a one­
way road. If you are 
facing this sign traf­
fic is coming toward 
you. You must not 
continue down the 
road. 
Traffic is required to 
keep to the right of 
medians or obstruc­
tions. 
55 miles per hour is 
the maximum speed 
limit permitted in this 
area. 
A right tum on red 
is prohibited, even 
after coming to a 
complete stop. 
Trucks are prohibited 
from entering this 
roadway. 

--sECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS 
Warning Signs 
Warning signs are usually yellow with black 
markings. (Warning signs can also be fluorescent 
green with black markings.) They alert you to 
conditions that are immediately ahead. There 
may be road hazards, changes in traffic direction, 
or some other potentially hazardous situation 
that requires action on your part. 
Sharp turn to the 
right and then sharp 
turn to the left. 
Side road enters 
highway ahead at 
an angle. 
The bridge ahead 
allows room for only 
two lanes of traffic. 
Approach with cau­
tion. 
Shoulder of the road 
is soft. Drive on the 
shoulder only in 
emergencies. 
Warning that you are 
leaving a separated 
one-way highway 
and will soon be 
driving on a two-way 
highway. 
LOW 
CW.RJHCE 
Sharp tum 
to the right. 
Winding road ahead. 
Another road crosses 
the highway ahead. 
There is a dip in the 
road ahead. Slow 
down! 
Divided highway 
begins. Prepare to 
change lanes or shift 
lane position. 
Approaching a low 
underpass. Do not 
enter if your vehicle 
or cargo exceeds the 
maximum height in­
dicated on the sign. 
30 
f l
► 
Curve to the right. 
Side road enters 
highway ahead. 
The road you are 
traveling on ends 
straight ahead. Slow 
down and prepare to 
yield or stop before 
turning right or left. 
There is a bump in 
the road ahead. Slow 
down! 
Divided highway 
ends. Prepare to 
change lanes or shift 
lane position. 
Steep hill ahead. 
Slow down and be 
ready to shift to lower 
gear to control speed 
and protect brakes 
from damage. 

Presence of traffic
signals at intersec­
tion ahead. Slow
down! 
Roadway is slippery 
when wet. Remem­
ber, the first half-hour 
of rain is most haz­
ardous. 
Traffic merging from 
the right. Prepare to 
allow traffic to safely 
merge. 
SECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS -
These signs alert 
drivers in ad­
vance of areas
where animals, 
people, and ve­
hicles may be
crossing. 
There is a yield sign 
ahead. Slow down 
and prepare to stop 
if necessary. 
There is a stop sign
ahead. Begin to slow 
down and be pre­
pared to stop. 
Drivers must stop and 
stay stopped when
pedestrians are in the
crosswalk. 
This sign is on the left
side of the highway 
and marks the begin­
ning of a no passing 
zone. Any passing
maneuver must be 
completed before
reaching this sign. 
These signs may be accompanied 
by speed advisory plaques that
indicate the speed with which you
should proceed. 
 
Number of lanes 
'-0/---
ONE Tm OR CALL COULi 
.. 
◄

--sECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS 
Guide Signs 
Guide signs may indicate what road you are on, and how to get to 
your destination. Many guide signs are rectangular, but some have 
other shapes. There are several different kinds of guide signs - route 
markers, information, destination, di tance, and location ign . These 
igns may be accompanied by a "To" ign or an arrow, indicating the 
highway, facility, or location that can be reached by following the signs. 
Here are some examples: 
The numbers on these signs des­
ignate specific exits, interstates 
or highways. 
Intersection of U.S. 
Route 47 & Ga. High­
way 38. These roads 
are going to cross or 
meet the highway you 
are traveling on. 
Milepost mar1<­
ers are placed 
each mile along 
the edge of the 
roadway from 
one end of the 
state to the oth­
er. Zero always 
starts at the 
south or west 
border where 
a route begins. 
44 
EXIT 
1f 
Caution - a vehicle displaying this 
emblem is a slow-moving vehicle. 
A slow-moving vehicle is defined 
as any vehicle moving less than 
25 miles per hour. They are 
required by law to display 
this emblem. 
32 
f l 
► 
This sign mar1<s an offi­
cially designated bicycle 
route. Be cautious of bi­
cyclists while traveling on 
this road. 
I ____.. I 
This sign means there 
is a public parking area 
in the direction of the 
arrow. 
The cross-buck is placed at all railroad 
crossings. Yield to any approaching trains. 
Slow down, look and listen before cross­
ing. A sign below the cross-buck indicates 
the number of tracks. A complete stop is 
required when a red light is flashing. 

===============:-csEcnON  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS---
Constntction and Maintenance Warning Signs 
ROAD 
CONSTRUCTION 
5 MILES 
Warning signs for construction and maintenance projects are used to alert you 
to dangers ahead and give you enough time to adjust your speed accordingly. 
These signs arc orange with black markings. 
Service Signs 
While traveling along Georgia's highways, the fol­
lowing blue and white signs will give directions to 
service facilities. 
FOOID " PHONIE
GAS • LODGING 
HOSPITAL 
CAMPING: 
NEXT RIGHT 
EXPRESS IANES 
Express Lanes offer motorists the option to pay a toll to bypass 
congestion in certain areas on the interstate. All vehicles with no 
more than two axles or up to six wheels can use Express Lanes if 
they have a registered Peach Pass. When the vehicle travels through 
the Express Lane, the toll amount will automatically be deducted 
from the pre-established account. There are currently two sets of 
Express Lanes in Georgia. 
The 1-85 Express Lanes are HOT Lanes along 1-85 North in Gwinnett 
County. They are open 24-hours per day. On the 1-85 Express Lanes, 
registered transit, three or more person carpools, motorcycles, emer­
gency vehicles, and Alternative Fuel Vehicles (AFV) with the proper 
AFV license plate are allowed to use the lanes toll-free. 
The 1-75 South Metro Express Lanes are reversible lanes along 
1-75 South in Henry and Clayton counties. Reversible lanes change
directions during the day to provide additional travel options during
peak travel periods. When the travel direction is being reversed, signs
will show the lanes are closed. On the 1-75 South Metro Express
ROAD 
CLOSED 
Lanes, all vehicles, including motorcycles and electric vehicles, are 
required to pay a toll. Public transit buses, registered vanpools and 
emergency response vehicles may use the lanes toll-free if they have 
a Peach Pass. 
EXPRESS 
LANES 
"' ENTRANCE 
■10NlYI■ 
EXPIRESS 
LAINES 

--sECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS 
Traffic Signals and Signs 
Traffic signals are placed at intersections to control 
the orderly movement of traffic and to prevent crashes. 
Drivers (including bicyclists) and pedestrians must obey 
these ignals except when an officer is directing traffic. U 
a traffic signal i not fun tioning at all at an intersection, 
all drivers must treat the intersection as if a stop sign is 
posted for all directions. U a traffic signal is malfunc­
tioning and flashing, drivers must proceed based on the 
color of the flashing signal they are facing: if the driver is 
facing a yellow flashing signal, the driver may proceed 
with caution; if the driver is facing a red fl.a hing ignal, 
the driver mu t stop and wait until it is safe to proceed. 
A red light means you must make a 
complete stop before entering the 
crosswalk or intersection and wait 
until the light turns to green before 
proceeding. 
A yellow light warns that the light is 
changing from green to red. Slow 
clown and prepare to stop. 
A green light means you may pro­
ceed if it is safe to do so after stop­
ping for pedestrians and yielding 
to vehicles within the intersection. 
Lane Control Signals 
Overhead Lane Signs 
Some roadways are designed to accommo­
date different traffic demands during the day 
through the use of a reversible lane system. Ap­
propriate travel lanes on a roadway utilizing a 
reversible lane system are indicated as follows: 
No travel allowed in this 
lane in the direction you 
are going. 
"Steady" - clear the lane 
"Flashing" - left tum 
permitted. 
Travel in lane. 
 
ONLY 
Left tum only. 
Straight or left 
tum only. 
(' 
I ONLY 
Right tum only. 
34 
f l 
► 
A green arrow means you may pro­
ceed carefully only in the direction 
the arrow is pointing after stopping 
for pedestrians and yielding to vehicles 
within the intersection. In this case you 
may go straight ahead only. 
A green arrow, in this case, means 
you may tum in the direction of the 
arrow after stopping for pedestrians 
and yielding to vehicles within the in­
tersection. 
A yellow arrow may appear after a 
green arrow and warns you to clear 
the intersection. 
A red flashing light means you must 
stop completely (treat as you would a 
stop sign). Proceed with caution only 
after yielding the right-of-way to pe­
destrians and to other vehicles at the 
intersection. 
A yellow flashing light means you must 
slow clown and exercise caution before 
proceeding through the intersection. 
Pedestrian Signals 
-


-
------
WALK 
Leave the curb to 
cross the street. 
Do not leave curb. 
A flashing yellow arrow 
means you may tum left 
after yielding to oncom­
ing traffic and pedestrians 
(oncoming traffic still has 
the green light). 
Min SIART 
- fi i Cress in l
II Star1ed
Tl [ RENIJNING 
l Fi i c,mirq
Flashing - do not leave curb, but complete 
walking across the street if already started. 

Pedestrian-Hybrid Beacons (PHB) 
This signal is known as a Pedestrian Hybrid Beacon (PHB), and it is designed to help pedestrians safely cross busy streets. Pedestrians push 
a button to activate the overhead beacon and stop road traffic. When WALK appears on the Pedestrian signal, pedestrians can cross the street. 
Dark 
Solld Red 
The PHB remains DARK for traffic unless a pedes-
The solid yellow is followed by double SOLID RED 
trian activates the push-button. 
signals, requiring drivers to stop. 
Flashing 
When a pedestrian presses the button, the signal 
is activated. Approaching drivers will see a FLASH­
ING YELLOW signal for a few seconds. 
Solid Yellow 
The flashing yellow is followed by a SOLID YEL­
LOW signal, indicating drivers should reduce 
speed and be prepared to stop. 
Flashing Red 
The double solid red signals are followed by al­
ternating FLASHING RED signals. This requires 
drivers to come to a full STOP, and proceed when 
pedestrians have cleared the crosswalk. The 
signal will then go dark until activated again by 
a pedestrian. 

--sECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS 
Railroad Crossings 
Pavement Markings 
Pavement markings, like highway signs, are used to warn and direct drivers and to regulate 
traffic. 
Stop Lines 
Stop lines are white lines painted across the pavement at intersections indicating the point beyond 
which your vehicle should not cross if you are stopping for a traffic control device. In urban areas, the 
line is usually located about four feet before the crosswalk. Drivers must come to a complete stop at 
the stop line, when present, not at the actual stop sign or traffic signal. 
Crosswalk Lines 
These white lines are painted across, or partially across the pavement. Sometimes they will be painted 
in a ladder pattern. When pedestrians are in the crosswalks, they have the right-of-way over motor 
vehicles. Crosswalks are sometimes in the middle of a block in residential areas, and in some cases, 
a pedestrian crossing signal is located at the white line. 
When a road is crossed by a railroad crossing, the pavement is usually marked with a large X and two R's. At 
railroad crossings, a yellow line is always placed on the right side of the center line to prevent passing. The cross­
ing is sometimes equipped with control arms and/or emergency lights, to warn drivers of approaching trains. The 
driver of the vehicle must stop if warning signals indicate a train is approaching. 
Edge Lines 
Center Lines 
These are used to separate traffic moving in opposite directions on paved roadways. Broken yellow 
lines are used when there are only two lanes and it is safe to pass in either direction. 
No Passing Lines 
Single Lines 
These single, solid yellow lines on two-lane roads indicate zones where passing is prohibited. They will 
be located on the right of the broken yellow line when they apply to the lane in which you are traveling. 
In some instances, both yellow lines will be solid, indicating it is not safe for passing in either direction. 
Double White Lines 
These are double white line (dashed or solid) pavement markings on roadways that indicate where 
vehicles can or cannot cross to access the adjacent lane. When the double white lines are dashed, 
vehicles are allowed to cross over to the adjacent lane. When the double white lines are solid, lane 
changes are prohibited. 
These are the solid white lines along the side of the pavement. They serve as safety guides, especially at 
night when it is difficult to see the edge of the road. A yellow edge line may be used on the left side to warn 
of narrow or raised medians. 
e e s e 
Lane Lines 
These are the white dashes that mark the individual lanes of travel on streets and highways having more than 
one lane for traffic moving in the same direction. 
When there are four or more lanes with traffic moving in opposite drections, two solid yellow lines mark the 
center of the roadway. You may cross these lines only to make a left turn into or from an alley, private road, 
driveway, or another street. When traveling on a multi-lane road, stay in the right lane except to pass other 
vehicles traveling in the same direction. 
Traffic Striping 
These markings, created by diagonal yellow lines, are on streets and highways indi­
cating that the road is narrowing or there is an obstruction on the roadway. The area 
is similar to a triangle with solid yellow diagonal lines within the outside lines. Always 
keep to the right of these markings. 

SECTION  SIGNS, SIGNALS & MARKINGS -
Turn lanes 
These lanes, bordered by solid yellow and/or broken yellow lines, is in the 
center of many streets and highways to make left turns. A motorist desiring 
to tum left should proceed to the tum lane just prior to making a left tum. 
Georgia law prohibits the use of this lane for any purpose other than making 
a left tum. You may enter this lane no more than 300 feet from the location 
of the left tum. 
When a turning lane is provided for vehicles traveling in both directions, 
you should use extreme caution before entering the turning lane to make 
a left tum. There may be a vehicle traveling in the opposite direction also 
entering the turning lane to make a left tum. This is especially problematic 
in congested areas. 
Bicycle Lanes 
These are solid white lines typically located between the farthest right traffic 
lane and the curb or edge of the roadway. If there is a right-tum-only lane 
present, the bicycle lane will be located to the left of the right-tum-only 
lane in order to safely accommodate bicycles traveling straight through the 
intersection. Bicycle lanes may also be marked with painted symbols of a 
bicycle. Drivers of motor vehicles are prohibited from driving or parking in 
the bicycle lane, except to cross over it to make a turn. When crossing over a 
bicycle lane to make a tum, motorists must yield to bicyclists that are present. 
ROUNDABOUTS 
Navigating a roundabout 
Roundabouts are sometimes used at 
intersections instead of stop signs. The 
purpose of a roundabout is to allow the 
intersection to handle heavier traffic flow 
without the need for a signal or a four-way 
stop. When entering a roundabout, traffic 
laws concerning right-of-way still apply. 
You must yield to other traffic that is 
already in the roundabout. You will al­
ways enter a roundabout to the right, and 
continue circling until you have reached 
the roadway onto which you want to tum. 
When reaching the desired road, you will 
always exit to the right. 
i PEDESTRIANS 
@Approach: At the pedestrian crosswa , k>ok to make 
sure cars stop for you. Use pedestrian 
crossing signal if available. 
®cross: 
Cross to the pedestrian refuge. 
Look to make sure cars stop for you. 
Finish crossing to the opposite sidewalk. 
Never cross to the center island. 
A CYCLISTS 
Experienced cyclists may navigate roundabouts 
like motorists. Do not hug the curb. Ride in the 
middle of the lane to prevent vehicles from 
passing you. Stop for pedestrians in crosswalks. 
Children or cyclists who are not comfortable 
enterilllJ the flow of traffic sholJd walk their 
cycles and act as pedestrians. 
Navigating a Single Lane Roundabout 
 
MOTORISTS 
G)Approach: Slow down to the posted advisory 
speed. Slop for pedestrians in the 
crosswaJk; they have the right ohvay_ 
@Enter. 
When entering the roundabout, 
yield to all circulating vehicles. 
Wai1 for a gap and then merge 
into traffic in the roundabout. 
Traffic in a roundabout always 
circulates counterclockwise. 
@Proceed: 
Continue circling through the 
roundabout until you reach the 
roadway onto which you want 
to tum. 
@)Exit: 
Signal, then bear right to exit the 
roundabout. Slop for pedesb'ians in the 
crosswalk. 
Navigating a Multilane Roundabout 
(!)Approach: 
@Proceed: 
@Exit: 
 
MOTORISTS 
Follow the lane use signs & pavement 
marking arrows. Get into the correct 
lane before entering the roundaboul 
Slow down to the posted advisory speed. 
Stop for pedestrians in the crosswaJk; 
they have the right of way. 
When entering the roundabout, yield to 
all circulating vehicJes in both lanes. 
Wait for a gap and then merge into traffic 
in the roundaboul Traffic in a roundabout 
always circulates counterclockwise. 
Maintain your lane as you enter 
the roundabout. 
Continue circling through the roundabout 
until you reach the roadway onto which 
you want to turn. Oo not change lanes in 
the roundabout. 
Signal, then bear right to exit the 
roundabout. Stop for 
pedestrians in the crosswaJk. 
• Pwnila 
 ...
. ........  
o- ...... 
.,_. 
81. n..1M R<><JIW!IINIUI 
•Please note that these roundabout diagrams are examples 
only and do not represent all roundabout designs. 

-0 =0iilEm @J
SAFETV 
GUIDEUNES 
This Section Covers 
Entering the Car ................................................... 38 
Steering ................................................................. 38 
Fog ......................................................................... 38 
Hydroplaning ........................................................ 38 
Skidding ................................................................ 38 
Curves ................................................................... 38 
Leaving the Roadway ........................................... 39 
Tire Blow-Out. ..................................................... 39 
Winter Driving ...................................................... 39 
Carbon Monoxide ................................................ 39 
Steering Locks .................................................... 40 
Following Too Closely .......................................... 40 
Speed and Stopping Distance ............................ 40 
Expressway Driving ............................................. 40 
Entering Expressways .......................................... 40 
Exiting Expressways ........................................... 40 
Use of Lanes on Expressways ............................ 40 
Gores .................................................................. 40 
HOV Lanes ........................................................... 40 
Tips for Expressway Driving ................................ 40 
Other Highway Emergencies..............................................41 
Protecting the Air ................................................. 41 
Idling Engines ....................................................... 41 
ffRE PRESSURE 
Prior to entering vehicle check tire pressure 
using recommended psi located in the door 
jam of the vehicle. Use a tire pressure gauge to 
check your psi. If your psi is above the mun­
ber listed on your door jam, let air out until 
it matches. [f below, add air (or have a retailer 
help you) until it reaches the proper number. 
You may also measure tread depth using 
the penny test. Once every month, or before 
you embark upon a long road trip, check 
your tires for wear and damage problems. 
One easy way to check for wear is by using 
the permy test. 
1. Take a penny and hold Abraham Lincoln's
body between your thumb and forefinger.
2. Select a point on your tire where the tread
appears the lowest and place Lincoln's
head into one of the grooves.
3. If any part of Lincoln's head is covered
by the tread, you're driving with the legal
and safe amount of tread. If your tread
gets below that (approximately 2/32 of
an inch), your car's ability to grip the road
in adverse conditions is greatly reduced.
Traffic laws alone cannot regulate every type 
of driving situation that may occur. There are 
some general rules which drivers should under­
stand and follow. Read this chapter with care. 
Someday these safety tips might help you avoid 
a crash, serious injury, or even death. These are 
only general statements and cannot dictate your 
actions in all situations. It is up to you to evalu­
ate the situation and make a determination as 
to the best course of action. 
Entering the Car 
• Develop a routine for entering the car safely
and preparing for your trip. U you are parked
on the street, enter from the curb side of the
vehicle. If this is not possible, wait w1til your
entry can be made with reasonable safety and
without interfering with the flow of traffic;
• Have your keys ready, and approach the ve­
hicle facing traffic;
• Adjust your seat and mirrors;
• Check passengers to be sure they are properly
seated and do not interfere with your view;
• Before starting your ignition, fasten your
scat belt and make sure your passengers do
the same;
• After starting your vehicle, check around
your vehicle for hazards or approaching traf­
fic, including bicyclists and pedestrians, give
the proper signal and move cautiously into
the stream of traffic.
Steering 
Good posture while driving is important 
because it allows a better view of hazards and 
more control of the vehicle. As a general rule, 
when gripping the steering wheel, place your 
left hand at the 9 o'clock position and your right 
hand at the 3 o'clock position on the wheel. Some 
manufacturers recommend placing your hands 
at 8 o'clock and 4 o'clock positions when the 
vehicle is equipped with air bags. Check your 
owner's manual or contact your vehicle manu­
facturer to determine which position is best for 
your vehicle. Always keep both hands on the 
wheel unless you are safely performing another 
driving-related task, such as activating your 
turn signal. 
Fog 
If possible, avoid driving in heavy fog. If you 
must drive, follow these guidelines: 
• Reduce d riving speed;
• Reduce speed further when you see head­
lights or red tail Lights. These indicate the
presence of another vehicle and, due to fog,
it may be more diffi ult to accurately judge
the distance between your vehicle and others;
• Dim your headlights. Bright lights produce a
glare in heavy fog, actually making it more
difficult to see than when using regular
headlights;
• Do not drive with parking or hazard lights on.
38 
fl 
► 
Hydroplaning 
Hydroplaning occurs when there is standing 
water on a roadway. At speeds up to 35 mph, 
most tires will channel water away from the tire 
similar to the way a windshield wiper cleans 
the windshield. As your speed increases, tires 
cannot channel the water as welJ, and your 
tires may start to lose contact with the road 
and ride over the water like a set of water skis. 
In a standard passenger car, partial hydroplan­
ing can begin at speeds as low as 35 mph. At 
55 mph, the tires may lose all contact with the 
road. Jf this occurs, there is no friction avail­
able to brake, accelerate, or steer. It is possible 
for the vehicle to go into an unpredictable and 
uncontrollable skid. If this occurs, take your 
foot off of the accelerator, letting the car slow 
down. To prevent hydroplaning, maintain good 
tires with adequate water-channeling thread 
on your vehicle. Most importantly, slow down 
when there is water on the roadway. 
Skidding 
A car skids when its tires lose their grip on 
the road surface. When a car skids, both the 
power that the engine sends to the wheels and 
the braking ability of the wheels are lost. Slick 
surfaces can exaggerate normal movements. 
Tf brakes are applied too hard, or the wheel is 
turned too sharp, a skid can occur. 
If you start to skid: 
• ease your foot off of the accelerator;
• begin turning thesteering wheel in the direc­
tion of the skid;
• once you have regained control of the veltlcle,
you can lightly apply brakes and steer in a
safe direction.
Remember, the first half-hour of rainfall is 
the most dangerous because roadways become 
extremely slippery when the water mixes with 
oil and other chemicals on the road surfaces. 
Curves 
urves in a roadway are potential sources of 
hazard for drivers. Because of the maneuvering 
involved, it is more likely that a less cautious 
driver may fail to maintain their lane while 
driving through a curve. When roadways are 
slick because of rain or other hazards, curves 
can be especiaily dangerous and require much 
lower speeds than when the road is dry. Sharper 
curves are usually marked with a safe miles­
per-hour sign. Usually less than the posted 
speed limit, these advisory signs indicate that 
the reduced speed shown will make driving 
through a curve safer. 

SECTION 8: SAFETY GUIDELINES -
Reduce your speed before entering these 
curves. If, while driving through the curve, you 
realize that you are traveling too fast, do not 
forcefully apply brakes because this may cause 
your vehicle to skid. Instead, take your foot off 
the accelerator, carefully apply the brake, and 
continue steering in the lane of travel. 
Leaving the Roadway 
Uneven terrain and obstacles make it difficult 
to safely maneuver a vehicle once it has left the 
roadway. Serious injury or death can result from 
a crash if this happens. 
To avoid leaving the roadway while driving, 
pay attention to road conditions. Drive at or be­
low the speed indicated on a regulatory sign or 
an advisory sign indicating potential hazards. 
Drive defensively, being mindful of the actions 
of drivers around you. 
If your vehicle leaves the roadway, try to fol­
low these guideline 
• Don't panic;
• Take your foot off the accelerator;
• Grip the steering wheel tightly and be pre­
pared to withstand sudden shocks;
• Don't hit the brake pedal suddenly and hard;
use your brakes carefully;
• Don't try to turn back onto the pavement im­
mediately. Overcompensating ("jerking the 
Winter Driving 
Winter weather can create many driving 
hazards. Because of the usually mild climate, 
most Georgians arc not experienced in driving 
in winter weather. Here are several ugge tions 
to help you drive safely in winter weather: 
• Use chains or snow tires if road conditions
require extra traction. Always check the
manufacturer's instruction manual for your
vehicle, the tires, and the chains before in­
stalling them on your vehicle and operating
on a roadway;
• Keep windows clear. Remove snow and ice
from aJI window surfaces before operating
the vehicle on a roadway;
• When you first enter the roadway, and if it
is safe to do so, get a "feel" for the road. Test
your brakes gently. Determine how your
vehicle will respond to turning the wheel
by making slight adjustments. Never apply
sudden braking. Instead, slow down gradu­
ally before you come to an intersection, make
a turn, or stop;
• Keep a safe distance between you and other
vehicles;
• Redu e speed a cording to conditions;
• Watch for hazards or changing road condi­
tions ahead. 
wheel") when returning to the roadway can Tips for Safe Winter Driving 
cause you to lose control of your vehicle by 
• 
et your car rviced routinely.
skidding or flipping, or may also cause your
car to go into other lane of traffic;
• Check your battery.
• Check your cooling system.
• Fill your windshield washer reservoir.
• Check your windshield wipers and defrosters.
• Verify floor mat installation to prevent pedal
interference.
• Inspect your ti res.
• Check the age of your tires.
• Know your car.
• Plan your travel and route.
• Stock your vehicle with necessary tools and
supplies.
• Learn what to do in a winter emergency.
Carbon Monoxide 
Car produce carbon monoxide, a deadly 
odorless and colorless gas. Symptoms of car­
bon monoxide poisoning are udden wearin s, 
yawning, dizziness, and nausea. Simple precau­
tions to avoid carbon monoxide are: 
• Don't leave the car motor running in a garage;
• Don't leave the car motor running and the
window closed while the car i parked;
• Don't operate the heater or air conditioner in
a parked car with the windows closed;
• Don't drive with a defective muffler or ex­
hau t sy tern.
• Wait until your speed has reduced, check
the traffic, and look for a place to safely re­
turn to the roadway by merging into traffic.
If nece sary, come to a complete stop before
re-entering the roadway.
DNERGING DIAMOND INJERCHANGE 
Tire Blow-Out 
Unlike a slow leak which may cause a tire to 
go fl.at over time, a blow-out occurs when the 
tire ruptures and goes Aat immediately. If this 
occur while your vehicle i in motion, it can 
cause you to lose control. 
If you experience a sudden tire blow-out, do 
not panic. Follow these guideline to maintain 
control of the vehicle. 
• Apply brakes lightly if necessary and safe
todo so;
• Grasp the steering wheel firmly and take
your foot off the accelerator to allow the ve­
hicle to roll to a top;
• Do not move to the shoulderof the road until
the car has slowed greatly. If the blow-out
causes the car to swerve on to the shoulder,
do not try to get back on the pavement. Let the
car coast to a stop. See the guideline above
for what to do when your vehicle leave the
roadway.
A Diverging Diamond Interchange (DOI) 
shifts traffic flow to the opposite side of 
the road to allow vehicles to enter the 
freeway by turning left onto an on-ramp 
without stopping. This reduces points 
of conflict and improves traffic flow and 
safety. The DOI is a proven, cutting edge, 
low-cost design that provides immediate 
traffic relief. Under normal, free-flowing 
traffic conditions on surrounding high­
ways, the DOI can reduce delays in eve­
ning rush hours up to 20 percent. 
Scan this QR code to 
view an Informative 
video about Diverging 
Diamond Interchanges 

-
SECTION 8: SAFETV GUIDEUNES
Move a victim of carbon monoxide poisoning 
to fresh air, contact emergency medical services, 
and give artificial respiration if it is necessary 
and you are trained to do so. 
Steering Locks 
Steering locks are anti-theft devices found in 
most cars manufactured since 1969. 
Steering locks can cause dangerous situations 
for drivers who arc not familiar with their opera­
tion. If a vehicle's ignition is placed in the Jock 
position whjle the vehicle is in motion, the steer­
ing capability of the vehicle will be disabled, and 
the driver will be unable to steer the vehicle. 
Further information concerning steering 
locks is available from the Automobile Safety 
Foundation at www.carsafe.org. 
Following Too Closely 
A rear-end crash is caused by following an­
other vehicle too closely. When following an­
other vehicle on any street or highway, there 
must be enough distance for you to safely stop 
if the vehicle in front of you suddenly slows 
down or stops. One way to determine if there is 
enough distance between your vehicle and the 
vehicle in front of you is to measure the amount 
of time between when the vehicle in front of 
you passes a reference point and when your 
vehicle passes the same reference point Watch 
the car ahead of you. When it passes a reference 
point, such as a telephone pole or street sign, 
count "one-thousand-one, one-thousand-two." 
Tf you pass the same spot before you are through 
counting, you are following too c.losely. Ou ring 
inclement weather, during construction, during 
heavy traffic, and always at rught, the distance 
between yow- vehicle and the vehlcle in front of 
you should be even greater. 
Speed and Stopping Distance 
The distance it takes to stop your vehlcle is 
important in determining a safe driving speed. 
The chart below may be used as a guide, but 
actual stopping distance can depend on the 
following factors in addition to vehicle speed: 
:2'0rnpll 
IIOm¢, 
Estimated Emergency 
Stopping D]s1ance 
oi:,nv-11 RJ1 
ari ll _  
c• 
i 
,tD 
n, 
ltCI 
110 
n 
t IICi 
liCil 
ffl 
10I 
• Mental and physical reaction of the driver;
• 'fype and condition of the pavement;
• Kind of tires and tread composition;
• Chassis (frame) design;
• Type of brakes, condition, and balance of
brakes;
• Wind direction and velocity.
Speed is a leading factor in serious injury and
death as a result of traffic crashes. The greater 
the speed, the greater the force of impact. The 
illustration below conveys the relative force of 
impact when you strike a fixed object. 
Strilking something 
at these speeds is 
like driving off a 
one, four or nine 
tory building 
Expressway Driving 
EE 
EE 
EB 
OOMPH 
An expressway differs from normal roads 
or highways in that access to it is controlled. 
Vehlcles can only enter and exit the expressway 
at specific places known as interchanges. Mo t 
expressways in Georgia are free, but there are 
a few that require a toll. 
With the exception of the controlled enter/ 
exit points and HOV lanes, expressways are 
simila1· to h·aveling on a divided hlghway. There 
is a median separating traffic traveling in op­
posite directions; lanes are marked with dashed 
lines, and the edge of the roadway is marked 
with a solid line; slower traffic should keep to 
the right; and all traffic laws and guidelines 
associated with safe driving still apply. 
Entering Expressways 
The entrance ramp is a short one-way road 
that leads to the expressway. From the entrance 
ramp, you should move into the acceleration 
lane. This is the lane that runs alongside the 
main roadway. In the acceleration lane, you 
can adjust your speed to the speed of the ex­
pressway traffic. When safe to do so, you should 
merge into traffic. Vehicles on the expressway 
have the right of way, but courteous drivers will 
permit you to move into the expressway traffic. 
Exiting Expressways 
Prepare to exit a controlled access highway 
by safely moving to the right lane for an exit on 
the right, or the left lane for an exit on the left .. 
Guide signs will tell you of the approaching exit 
At the exit, deceleration lanes are provided for 
slowing down when leaving the expressway. 
Posted exit speeds are usually low due to the 
design of the roadway. Drivers should use either 
brake lights or a turn signal to indicate a change 
in speed to the drivers behind if slowing down 
in the traveling lane when preparing to exit. 
40 
fl 
► 
Use of Lanes on Expressways 
Drivers operating vehicles on divided high­
ways must drive to the right of the median w1-
less directed to do otherwise by a sign, traffic 
control device, or police officer. Drivers must 
obey the yellow or white striping on the roadway 
that indicates Janes, the convergence of Janes, 
or areas in which vehicles shouJd not operate. 
Drivers may only access or exit controlled-access 
roadways at designated entrances and exits. 
Gores 
The term "gore" means the area of conver­
gence between two lanes of traffic. The gore is 
the area, usually similar to a triangle, formed 
by solid white lines between an existing lane of 
travel and a merging lane of travel. Gores are 
most often seen at the convergence of an ac­
celeration lane and the adjacent travel lane on 
a controlled access highway. The gore is the area 
bounded by solid white lines between the ac­
celeration lane and the adjacent travel lane. 
Drivers entering the controlled access hlghway 
are prohibited by law from crossing this solid 
white line, and are required to continue travel­
ing in the acceleration lane until the solid white 
Line disappears. 
HOV Lanes 
High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes are 
travel lanes that are restricted to vehlcles with 
more than one occupant, buses, motorcycles, and 
vehicles with Alternative Fuel Vehicle license 
plates. The lanes are marked with a diamond 
symbol and the how-s of restriction are posted. 
The penalty for violating HOV lane restrictions is 
a fine up to $75 for a first offense; up to $100 for a 
second offense; up to $150 for a third offense; and 
up to $150 plus one point added to the violator's 
driving record for a fourth or subsequent offense. 
HOVLANES 
Double White Lines (No Entry) 
Dashed White Line (You _ fay Enter) 
HOT Lanes 
High Occupancy Toll (HOT) lanes are 1-85 
Express Lanes that allow registered transit, three 
or more person carpool, motorcycles, emergency 
vehicles, and Alternative Fuel Vehicles to use the 
lanes toll-free. 
Tips For Expressway Driving 
• Plan your trip carefully. Mark the map to 
indicate all entrances, service areas, and exits

you plan to use. Doing these things will help 
you to have a safe, fast, and pleasantjoumey. 
You can check the website www.511ga.org 
for road construction, road closures, exit 
numbers, and other information to help plan 
your trip; 
• Check your car before you start. Because
expressways are designed for faster and
smoother flowing traffic, there are fewer
places to exit. It is important to check your
gasoline gauge and make sure you have
enough fuel. Also check the water, oil, and
tires of your vehicle;
• Be alert. Use your rear view mirror and side
mirror to constantly check the traffic around
you. Always make visual traffic checks before
you change lanes;
• Stay out of another driver's blind spot. Travel­
ing in a position where the driver ahead of
you cannot observe your vehicle in the rear
view or side mirrors is a dangerous practice;
the driver might pull out in front of you to
pass a car. Either stay far enough behind so
that the other driver can see you, or pass the
vehicle. This is especially true for driving
near large vehicles. Tractor-trailer combina­
tions, also known as "eighteen-wheelers", are
limited in their visibility because of their size;
• Use turn signals. Be sure to activate your
right or left tum signal to indicate that you
are changing lanes BEFORE you begin the
maneuver;
• Allow plenty of room when passing. Return­
ing to your lane of travel before you have
passed another vehicle and provided enough
safe distance between the two can cause a
crash. Carefully check the left lane behind
you before pulling out to pass. Don't pull
back into the right-hand lane until you can
see the car that you just passed clearly in your
rear view mirror;
• Always obey the posted maximum and
minimum speed limits. These laws exist to
regulate the flow of traffic and to create a safe
environment for all drivers;
• In metro areas, expressways will usually
have a dramatically increased amount of
traffic during the hours that most drivers are
traveling to and from their places of employ­
ment. The number of cars on the expressway
during this time will lead to delays. During
this time, drivers should be particularly cau­
tious. Driving defensively, allowing a safe
distance between vehicles, and obeying all
traffic control signs and devices can help en­
sure a safe commute;
• Don't back up. Driving in reverse on an ex­
pressway is prohibited under any circum­
stances;
• Stopping on the expressway is prohibited.
You will find rest areas and service signs at 
frequent intervals; use them. Stopping on the 
roadway shoulder is highly dangerous and
permitted only in an emergency. Switching
drivers, sh·etching, or retrieving an item from
the back of the vehicle is NOT considered
an emergency. If it is necessary to stop, raise
SECTION B: SAFETY GUIDELINES---
OTHER HIGHWAY EMERGENCIES 
• Apply mud, dirt,
dust or snow.
Check ditch for
water.
• Use hub cap to 
carry water to
wet apparel.
• Loosen dirt with
tire tool to throw
on fire.
Accelerator Jammed 
• Slap the pedal with
foot.
• Shift to neutral.
• Concentrate on
steering.
• Use brakes.
• Turn off ignition (not
to lock}.
the hood and activate your hazard lights to 
indicate difficulty. Don't walk along the ex­
pressway in search of help; 
• Drowsiness and fatigue is a danger anytime 
you drive, but is especially dangerous on long
trips along the expressway. Stop driving if you
feel drowsy. Don't rely on stimulant drugs
(also called Stay Awake Drugs). They are likely
to make your driving even more hazardous.
Expressway drivers are subject to "highway
hypnosis," a condition of drowsiness or un­
awareness brought on by monotony, the sound
of the wind, the tires on the pavement, and
the steady hum of the engine. On long trips it
is a good idea to "exercise your eyes" to help 
keep you alert. Keep shifting your eyes from 
one area of the roadway to another and focus 
on various objects, both near and far, left and
right. Conversation with other passengers and
lively radio programs may also help you re­
main more alert. Ofcourse,alwayspay atten­
tion to the traffic around you and potentially 
hazardous highway conditions; 
• Drive defensively. The key to defensive driv­
ing is awareness. You must keep your eyes
moving so that you can keep track of what
is happening around you at all times. Avoid 
staring at the center line on the roadway. In­
stead, look ahead for h-ouble spots which may 
endanger you or your passengers. A defensive 
driver will also frequently check the rear view 
and side mirrors to keep abreast of the traf­
fic and road conditions to the rear and sides; 
• Never trust other drivers to do what you think 
they are going to do or what you think they 
should do in a particular situation. The fact 
that a left tum signal is Aashing does not nec­
essarily mean that the driver is going to make
a left turn. You should constantly be thinking
of an "escape route" as you drive. For example, 
if you are approaching a curve, you should be
looking closely at the shoulder and nearby
area to determine what you would do if a car
approaching from the other direction crosses
to your side of the road. After a little practice 
this will become more instinctive.
Protecting the Air 
The operation of motor vehicles has a signifi­
cant impact on Georgia's air quality. Emissions 
from cars and light duty trucks contribute to 
the formation of ground-level ozone, a com-
Brakes Fail 
• Shift to lower gear.
• Use parking
brakes.
• Rub tire on the
curb.
• Look for a safe
area to slow to a
stop.
Wet Brakes 
• Test brakes lightly
after driving
through deep
water. Brakes may
pull to one side or
may not hold at all.
• Dry brakes by
driving slowly in low
gear while applying
brakes lightly.
ponent of urban smog. Vehicle emissions can 
react with sunlight at high temperatures to 
produce unhealthy levels of this form of air 
pollution. This is especially true during warm 
weather. Vehicle emissions and ground-level 
ozone can be reduced by proper vehicle main­
tenance in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions, and by fewer trips and vehicle 
miles traveled. 
In the thirteen-county metro Atlanta area, 
gasoline-powered cars and light-duty trucks 
that are less than 25 model years old must pass 
an emissions inspection every year prior to 
registering their vehicle with the county of res­
idence (the most recent three model years are 
exempt from this requirement). The thirteen 
metro cow1ties covered by the state's inspection 
and maintenance program are: Cherokee, Clay­
ton, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Fayette, 
Forsyth, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Paulding 
and Rockdale. For more detailed information 
about the emissions inspection program, call 
the Georgia Clean Air Force at 1-800-449-2471.
Remember removing or disabling a vehicle's 
emissions control components is a violation of 
federal and state law. 
Tn addition to proper vehicle maintenance, 
you can help reduce air pollution and traffic 
congestion by limiting driving to necessary 
travel, by pla.tuting ahead to consolidate trips, 
and by using carpools, transit and ridesharing. 
All drivers should do their part to reduce the 
impact of automobiles and trucks on air quality 
and the environment. 
Idling Engines 
Minimize your idling time. Eliminating un­
necessary idling can reduce fuel consumption, 
engine wear and air pollution. When warm­
ing up the engine, follow the manufacturer's 
guidelines to assure sufficient engine perfor­
mance for safe driving. Idling a vehicle for 10
seconds will consume more fuel than restart­
ing the engine. 
For more information on emissions test­
ing regulations & protecting Georgia's 
air quality: 
• www.cleanairforce.com;
• www.cleanaircampaign.com;
• www.gefa.org

-0 =0iilEm@
SHARING 
THE ROAD 
This Section Covers 
Sharing the Road With Pedestrians ................... 42 
Georgia's Law Concerning Pedestrians ............. . 42 
Crosswalks .......................................................... 42 
Respect Crosswalks ............................................ 42 
Blind Pedestrians ................................................ 42 
Always Remain Alert for 
Pedestrians When Driving ................................... 42 
Turning Right at a Red Traffic Signal... ................ 42 
Passing Stopped cars in Lanes of Travel.. ........... 42 
Exiting and Entering Driveways .......................... 42 
Vehicle Speed ...................................................... 42 
Sharing the Road With Bicycles .......................... 42 
Important Reminders Concerning 
Bicycle Riders ...................................................... 43 
Arm Signals Used by Bicyclists ........................... 43 
Sharing the Road With Motorcycles ................... 43 
Allow a Full Lane ................................................. 43 
Road Conditions .................................................. 43 
Intersections ....................................................... 43 
Following Too aose ............................................ 43 
Passing and Being Passed .................................. 43 
Partners on the Road .......................................... 43 
Sharing the Road With School Buses ................ 44 
Sharing the Road With 
Commercial Motor Vehicles ................................ 44 
Sharing the Road 
With Pedestrians 
While there has been an increase of motor 
vehicles on our roads, the number of persons 
traveling by foot is also growing. According 
to the Georgia Department of Transportation, 
pedestrians account for almost 15% of motor 
vehicl s deaths. In 2016, Georgia had a 15% in­
crease in pedestrian deaths. Distractions are 
believed to be a contributing factor. It is critical 
that pedestrians and motorists pay attention to 
safely share the road. 
Georgia's Law Concerning 
Pedestrians 
The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain 
stopped to allow a pedestrian to cross the road­
way within a crosswalk: 
•
When the pedestrian is upon the half of the
roadway on which the vehicle is traveling, or
when the pedestrian is approaching and is
within one lane of the half of the roadway on 
which the vehicle is traveling or onto which
it is turning. "Half of the roadway" means
aU traffic lanes carrying traffic in one direc­
tion of travel;
•
When making a left or right tum at any in­
tersection;
• At stop signs, after coming to a complete stop
and before proceeding;
• At traffic signals, even when the light is green,
if pedestrians are still in the crosswalk;
•
When entering a street or highway from an
alley, driveway, or private road;
•
When approaching a blind person who is
crossing a street or highway if he/she is car­
rying a white cane or being guided by a dog.
Crosswalks 
Crosswalks exist on all four corners of in­
tersections even when they are not marked by 
painted lines. A crosswalk is the part of the pave­
ment for pedestrian traffic where the sidewalk 
would extend across the street Crosswalks can 
also exist mid-block if they are marked. 
Respect Crosswalks 
When pedestrians are in crosswalks, they 
have the right of way over motor vehicles. Do 
not block crosswalks. When stopping at red 
lights or stop signs, always stop your vehicle 
before the crosswalk so pedestrians can cross 
safely. 
Even at crosswalks without traffic signals, 
drivers must stop and remain stopped for pe­
destrians in the crosswalk when the pedesh·ian 
is upon the half of the roadway or approaching 
and within one lane of the half of the roadway 
upon which the vehicle is traveling. "Half of 
the roadway" means all traffic lanes carrying 
traffic in one direction of travel. 
Blind Pedestrians 
Pedestrians using guide dogs or white walk­
ing canes must be given the right of way at aU 
times. 
Always Remain Alert for 
Pedestrians When Driving 
Look for pedestrians on both sides of the 
street when approaching intersections, when 
turning, or near schools, parks, bus stops and 
other places people are likely to walk. Look 
behind your car for children or other pedes­
trians before backing up in driveways and 
parking lots. 
Turning Right at a Red Traffic Signal 
Before turning right on red, drivers must 
come to a full and complete stop before the 
crosswalk. Do not block the crosswalk when 
waiting to make a right turn at a red light This 
puts pedestrians at risk, forcing them to walk 
around your vehicle. After looking to your left 
to find a gap in traffic, you must look to your 
passenger side to ensure a pedestrian is not 
crossing in front of your vehicle. 
42 
f L
► 
Passing Stopped Cars 
in Lanes of Travel 
Use extreme caution when passing stopped 
cars on multi-lane roads. A pedestrian you can't 
see may be crossing in a marked or unmarked 
crosswalk. This is a frequent cause of serious 
or fatal pedestrian injuries. When you stop at 
a crosswalk on a multi-lane road, stop at least 
10 feet before the crosswalk so a driver in the 
next lane can see the pedestrian. 
Exiting and Entering Driveways 
When exiting or entering a driveway, alley, 
or parking garage, drivers must stop before the 
sidewalk area and proceed only after pedestri­
ans have safely passed. Drivers waiting to tum 
left into a driveway must wait not only for a gap 
in oncoming traffic, but also for pedesh·ians 
to finish crossing the sidewalk portion of the 
driveway. 
Vehicle Speed 
Pedestrians are less protected from the hatm­
fu l effects of a crash than occupants of motor 
vehicles. The risk of serious or fatal pedestrian 
injuries increase exponentially with driver speed. 
The chart above illush·ates the effect of speed 
upon a pedestrian who is struck by a motor 
vehicle. When a pedestrian is struck by a motor 
vehicle traveling 40mph, the risk of pedestrian 
death is at least 80%. 
Sharing the Road With Bicycles 
Bicycle riding is an important type of h·ans­
portation, particularly for traveling to work and 
to school. Because bicyclists may be on any road 
at any time, drivers must always be alert for 
bicycle traffic. 
Bike-car crashes often happen because driv­
ers do not see bicyclists soon enough. In Georgia, 
as in other states, most crashes occur during 
daylight hours on straight, dry roads, typicaUy 
near intersections or driveways. 
Bicyclists are legally entitled to use every 
road in Georgia except the interstate and inter­
state-like highways (limited access highways). 
The law allows bicyclists use of the full lane. 
They a.re not required to be in a bike lane even 
when one is present Although their slower pace 
may slow motorists occasionally, it is important 
for drivers to respect the bicyclist's right to be 
there. Yield the right of way to the bicyclist in 
the same way that you would yield to another 
motorist. If possible, make eye contact with the 
bicyclist, especially at intersections. 
Road defects cause more problems for bi­
cycles than for cars. When passing a bicycle 
rider, leave the bicyclist plenty of room in case 
he or she has to swerve to miss a pothole or 
other danger in the road. The minimum legal 
space for a motorist to pass a bicyclist is 3 feet 
Tips for Trailering...................................44

Important Reminders 
Concerning Bicycle Riders 
Motorists should approach bicycles with due caution 
and shall proceed as follows: (Violation is a 
misdemeanor punishable bya fine up to$250.00). 
Make a lane change into a lane not adjacent to the 
bicycle if possible in the existing road and traffic 
conditions OR 
If a lane change is impossible, prohibited by law, or 
unsafe, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a 
reasonable and proper speed for the traffic conditions, 
which speed shall be at least ten miles per hour less 
than the posted speed limit or 25 miles per hour, 
whichever is more and proceed around the bicycle 
with at least three feet between the vehicle and the 
bicycle at all times. 
STATE LAW 
+3+ + 
F'EET 
"MINIMUM
•
Watch for bicyclists who may appear to
suddenly swerve or tum in front of you.
Bicyclists sometimes forget or do not
have the opportunity to merge left due to
traffic speed, in order to be in the left tum
position.;
•
Night time bicyclists will not always
have lights, and some may not even have
rcllcctors. If you meet an onroming bicyclist,
please dim your lights to avoid blinding the
bicyclist.
•
Bike lanes and any other bicycle
infrastructure are for the use of bicycles only.
Motorists are not to drive or park in a bike
lane.
•
Bicyclists are able to pass on the right
side of motorists if there is a dedicated
lane or sufficient room in a shared lane,
and it is safe to do so.
Arm Signals Used by Bicyclists 
Bicyclists should use their arms to signal to 
other motorists when they are going to make a 
tum, and the direction of the tum or when they 
are slowing or stopping. The signals used by 
bicyclists are listed below: . -
... 111 
LI! Tilffl 
'-i 
Rlthclllm 
I.Al.trmlt l 
SECDON fJ: SHARING THE ROAD ___ _ 
SHARING THE ROAD WITH MOTORCYCLES 
Today's motorcycle riders are friends, relatives, and neighbors, but many car drivers still have 
not adjusted to motorcycles appearing in traffic. Traveling by motorcycle is appealing to some 
people; they are fuel and space efficient and can be fun to ride. Motorcyclists have the same 
rights and responsibilities as automobile drivers. While everyone must follow the same traffic 
laws, motorcyclists face additional dangers because motorcycles require exceptional handling 
ability and motorcyclists are more vulnerable to injury and death than car drivers if involved in 
a crash. It is important to understand more about motorcycle operation. 
From ahead or behind, a motorcycle's outline, whether 2 or 3 wheels, is much smaller than a 
passenger vehicle's outline, and most drivers expect to see larger vehicles on the road and 
are not looking for motorcycles. The small profile of the motorcycle may make it appear farther 
away and traveling slower than it actually is. Drivers need to take a second look, and then a 
third. Always make a visual check (mirrors, too) of blind spots before entering or leaving a lane 
of traffic and at intersections. Be alert for a motorcyclist to appear unexpectedly. 
Allow a Full Lane 
Motorcycles are allowed the full width of a lane in which to maneuver. Although it may seem that 
there is enough room in the traffic lane for a motor vehicle and a motorcycle, the motorcycle 
needs the room to maneuver safely. Do not share the lane. Understand that motorcyclists may 
adjust lane position for their own safety, not to be reckless or show off. Motorcyclists often 
adjust position within a lane to be seen more easily or to minimize the effects of road debris, 
passing vehicles, or other conditions. Often, this means riding in the left portion of the traffic 
lane to allow a better view of some traffic and road situations. It also makes the motorcycle 
more visible to other traffic. However, as traffic and road conditions change, the rider may 
move. This move could be to the center of the lane or even to the right side to avoid traffic or 
to be seen by others on the road. 
Road Conditions 
Remember that road conditions which are minor annoyances to motorists can pose major 
hazards to motorcyclists. Motorcycle riders may change speed or adjust position within a lane 
suddenly In reaction to road and traffic conditions such as potholes, gravel, wet or slippery 
surfaces, pavement seams, railroad crossings, and grooved pavement. 
Intersections 
Intersections are the most likely places for car/motorcycle crash to occur. This usually is the 
result of a car driver NOT SEEING the motorcycle and turning Into the motorcycle's path. 
Misinterpreting a rider's intentions can also lead to crashes. The rider will move to one side 
of the lane in preparation for a turn or possibly to move away from a hazard unseen by other 
motorists. Do not assume the rider's intention until the maneuver is unmistakably started, 
such as a tum into an intersection or driveway. Don't be fooled by a flashing tum signal on a 
motorcycle- motorcycle signals may not be self-canceling and motorcyclists sometimes forget 
to turn them off. Wait to be sure the rider is going to tum before you proceed. 
Following Too Close 
Allow more following distance -- three or four seconds - when following a motorcycle so the 
motorcycle rider has enough time to maneuver or stop in an emergency. Space between the 
two vehicles should be increased to avoid sudden braking. In dry conditions, motorcycles can 
stop more quickly than cars. Both riders and drivers are more likely to make incorrect decisions 
if there is not enough stopping distance or ability to see and react to conditions. This leads to 
crashes. A rider's chance of injury is greater if forced to avoid obstacles ahead, as well as a 
driver following too closely. 
Passing and Being Passed 
The rules for passing other vehicles are similar for motorcycles. The motorist being overtaken 
by a motorcycle should maintain lane position and speed. Allow the motorcyclist to complete 
the pass and assume proper lane position as quickly as possible. When passing a motorcycle, 
allow a full lane to the motorcycle. Never crowd into the same lane as the motorcycle. Returning 
to the original lane too soon can force a rider to swerve to the right Into traffic or off the road. 
Partners on the Road 
What all this means is, motorcycles are full partners in the traffic mix and must be treated with 
the same courtesies. Watch for the unexpected and give them their share of the road; a rider 
may be the neighbor next door. 
E ,...-. 
This section Is designed to encourage drivers of all other kinds ol O  ...:.  
vehlctes and motorcyclsts to "share the road" with each other and Is 
, 
prO'llded throu[ the courtesy of the Motorcycle Safety Follldatlon 
\ 
and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
• 
rill 
	
· ..  

--sECTION 9: SHARING THE ROAD
Sharin_g_the Road W"lth 
Schoorsuses 
In most cases, all drivers are required to 
stop when approaching or meeting a stopped 
school bus that has its lights flashing and is 
loading or unloading passengers. The exception 
to this rule is when highways are separated in 
the center by median strips. In this situation, 
only vehicles following or traveling alongside 
a school bus in the same direction must stop. 
A warning will be given in advance by the 
flashing red or amber lights on the front and 
rearofthebus. Afterstopping,you must remain 
stopped until the bus resumes motion or deac­
tivates its warning signals AND all loading or 
unloading passengers have cleared the roadway. 
GEORGIA FINES & PENAL.TIES 
• Mandatory court apearance;
• Up to 6 points on driving record;
• Up to $1000 fine;
• A conviction under 21 years of
age constitutes license
suspension.
Sharing the Road With 
Commercial Motor Vehicles 
Commercial motor vehicles are vital to the 
economy of Georgia and the United States. Most 
of the products used in every day life were 
delivered to stores by commercial motor ve­
hicles. Drivers of commercial motor vehicles are 
trained, specially licensed driving professionals. 
Sharing the road with commercial motor ve­
hicles is a necessary part of travel. Heavy trucks 
typically weigh80,000 pounds or more, and driv­
ers should use caution when di·iving near them. 
Everyone should be aware of the differ­
ences between trucks and cars and behave ac­
cordingly. These include: 
• A fully loaded tractor-trailer, traveling 55 mph,
needs 3 times the distance a car needs to stop;
• Large trucks are more difficult to maneuver,
are longer and heavier, and require much
more room to tum;
• Large trucks have larger blind spots, called
"No-Zones."
The "No-Zone" represents the danger areas
around trucks and buses where crashes are more 
likely to occur. Some No-zones are actual blind 
spots or areas around trucks and buses 
a
where your car "disppears" from the view of 
the drivers. These blind spots are the Side 
No­zone, Rear No-Zone, and  Front 
No-Zone areas . 
Tips for Trailering
For many drivers, towing a trailer is a 
whole new experience with many 
challenges — here are a few tips to 
stay safe on the road.
Take Your Time
If You Lose Control, Stay Calm
Stay Within Capacity
Distribute the Weight
Inspect Your Trailer
Know Your Trailer and Practice Handling It 
Secure Your Load
Maintain your Trailer and Vehicle 
Consider Tow Mirrors
Get the Right Equipment
Consider Additional Safety Equipment
More information can be found at 
AAMVA.org on Safe Trailering.

•
Side 
o-Zones - Trucks and buses have big
o-Zones (blind spots) on both sides. They
are much larger than a car's blind spots. U
you cannot see the driver's face in the side­
view mirror, the driver cannot sec you. The
right ide No-Zone i particularly dangerous
because truck and bus driver must make
wide right turns.
•
Rear No-Zones - Unlike cars, trucks and
busc have huge o-Zones directly behind
them. Trucks and buses have no rear view
mirror. The truck or bus driver cannot see
your car there and you cannot see what is go­
ing on ahead of the truck or bus. rt is critical
to keep a safe distance behind a truck or bus
in case the driver slows or stops suddenly.
•
Front 
o-Zones -Trucks and bu 
require
more room and time to stop than cars. Be­
cause of this, more space hould be given in
front of trucks and buses. It is not safe to "cut
in front" of a truck and then slow down. To
avoid the Front No-Zone, make sure that you
can ee the entire front of the truck or bus
in your rear-view mirror before you merge
or pull into that lane of traffic.
In the illustration on the previous page, the
commercial motor vehicle's blind pots, or "No 
Zones," are highlighted in blue. These are areas 
to avoid when sharing the road with a truck 
or bus. 
THE GEORGIA TACT PROJECT 
Targeting Aggressive Cars & Trucks 
Law Enforcement officers are stopping people who drive unsafe around commercial motor 
vehicles, whether they are driving a car or commercial motor vehicle. 
What to do to avoid getting a citation: 
• Don't cut off commercial motor vehicles.
For safety, one car length for every 10
miles per hour of speed is recommended;
• Don't tailgate. Unlike cars, commercial
motor vehicles have big blind spots
behind them. Also, car drivers who
tailgate commercial motor vehicles can't
see traffic ahead. If the commercial motor
vehicle brakes suddenly, you have no
time to react and no place to go;
• Don't speed. Speed is a factor in nearly
one-third of all fatal crashes;
• Allow commercial motor vehicles plenty
of room. Be careful when you or the
commercial motor vehicle are entering a
highway or merging with traffic.
DONrr GET A cn-ATION 
• Reinstatements
•Motor Vehicle Report
·Renewal
·Replacement
·Change of Address
•Custom Alerts
·Locations
·Pay fees
Gll 11 0 
,,,,.... Google Play 
•And More!

-0=0ii1Emf/@
LOSING YOUR 
DRIVING PRIVILEGES 
This Section Covers 
Types of Withdrawals .......................................... 46 
Reporting Convictions ......................................... 46 
Types of Suspensions .......................................... 46 
Implied Consent ................................................... .47 
The Points System ............................................... 48 
Points Reduction ................................................. 48 
Points Avoidance ................................................. 48 
Safety Responsibility Law .................................. .48 
Mandatory Revocations ....................................... 48 
Limited Driving Permits ...................................... 48 
Commercial Driving Disqualifications ............ ..49 
Major Traffic VIOiations ....................................... 49 
Serious Traffic Violations .................................... 49 
Other Violations .................................................... 49 
The State of Georgia consideIS dangerous and 
negligent drivers to be a direct and immediate 
threat to the welfare and safety of the general 
public, and it is in the best interest of the citizens 
of Georgia to immediately remove such drivers 
from the highways of this state. Therefore, the 
Department of Driver Services is authorized 
to withdraw the license or driving privileges 
when evidence is obtained that the licensee is 
a habitually dangerous or negligent driver of 
a motor vehicle (from Georgia law §40-5-57) 
Types of Withdrawals 
The driver's license ofa ny ind ividua I, the eli­
gibility to obtain a driver's license, or the ability 
to legally operate a motor vehicle in th State of 
Georgia may be impacted by one or more of the 
following actions: 
Cancellation 
The Department of Driver Services is autho­
rized to cancel a license if the applicant fails to 
give the required or correct information needed 
at the time application is made, or if the indi­
vidual becomes otherwise ineligible after ap­
plication has been made. A resident may reapply 
for a License once the requirements have been 
satisfied and the resident is otherwise eligible. 
Revocation 
If a license is revoked, all driving privileges 
are terminated and withdrawn until the end 
of the period of time prescribed by the formal 
action of the Department. At the end of the re­
vocation period, a resident may apply for a new 
license. Non-residents may apply for reinstate­
ment of driving privileges. 
Suspension 
lf a license is suspended, all driving privi­
leges are temporarily withdrawn for a specific 
period of time or until reinstatement require-
ments have been completed. At the end of the 
withdrawal period, a resident may apply for 
reinstatement and return of the license or the 
eligibility to obtain a license. Non-residents may 
apply for reinstatement of driving privileges. 
Disqualification of Commercial 
Driver's License 
lf a commercial driver's license is disquali­
fied, all privileges to operate a oommercial mo­
tor vehicle are withdrawn for a specific period of 
time. At the end of the disqualification period, 
if a licensee holds a CDL license that is not ex­
pi red, the licensee's commercial privileges will 
be automatically restored without any action 
required, provided that the licensee is otherwise 
eligible to still maintain a commercial driver's 
license. If the licensee does not hold a CDL at 
the expiration of the disqualification period, 
the licensee's ability to apply for a CDL will 
be restored. 
A disqualification of commercial driving 
privileges does not, by itself, result in the sus­
pension or revocation of a licensee's privileges 
to operate a NO -commercial motor vehicle. 
However, many offenses that result in a com­
mercial disqualification also result in a non­
commercial suspension, though the periods of 
withdrawal may differ. In Georgia, it is possible 
to lose commercial driving privileges for LIFE 
upon the conviction of certain offenses. More 
information related to the commercial driver's 
license program is available on our website at 
dds.georgia.gov. 
Reporting Convictions 
Georgia courts are required by law to report 
the conviction of any offense that will result in a 
negative impact on a licensee's driving privilege 
or that is otherwise required to be posted to the 
permanent driving history of an individual. 
This includes most traffic-related offenses as 
well as certain non-traffic related offenses. 
When the DDS receives a conviction for a 
Georgia license holder, the record is updated to 
reflect the conviction. If a conviction is received 
for an individual who holds a license from an­
other state or is the resident of another state, 
the conviction information will be forwarded 
to the licensing authority of that state. lf a non­
resident, or a resident of Georgia who does not 
have a driver's license, is convicted of certain of­
fenses, the eligibility to obtain a Georgia driver's 
license and/or driving privileges in Georgia 
will be suspended. 
Convictions reported to the Georgia DDS by 
licensing authorities or courts in other states and 
nations will be pla ed on the driving record of 
a Georgia licensee or resident. The Department 
will treat such convictions as if they had oc­
curred in this state for the purpose of imposing 
license withdrawals. 
Types of Suspensions 
The Department will suspend the driving 
privileges of an individual in any of the follow­
ing non-conviction situations: 
• Refusal to take a chemical test for intoxica­
tion;
• Failure to appear in court or respond to a
citation;
• Non-payment of Child Support;
• Non-payment of the Super Speeder fee;
• Safety responsibility;
• Medical revocation;
• Parent requested revocation (under age 18).
The Department is required by law to sus­
pend the privileges of an individual for a convic­
tion of any of the following offenses: 
• Homicide by vehicle;
• Feticide by Vehicle (1st degree);
• Serious injury by vehicle;
• Driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs;
• Any felony in the commission of which a
motor vehicle is used;
• Using a motor vehicle in .fleeing or attempting
to elude an officer;
• Hit and run or leaving the scene of a crash;
• Racing;
• Operating a motor vehicle with a revoked,
canceled, or suspended registration;
• Driving without insurance;
• Driving while license is suspended, revoked,
or canceled;
• Refusal to weigh commercial motor vehicle;
• Violation of license restriction (at the discre­
tion of the tria I court).
In addition to the offenses listed above, the li­
cense and/or driving privileges of an individual 
under the age of 21 on the date of the conviction 
will be suspended for the following offenses: 
• Reckless driving;
• Aggressive driving;
• Speeding 24 mph or more over the speed
limit;
• Unlawful passing of a school bus;
• Improper passing on a hill or a curve;
• Any 4-point offense;
• Four or more points in 12 months prior to
age 18;

Implied Consent 
Georgia law requires you to submit to state 
administered chemical tests of your blood, 
breath, urine, or other bodily substances for 
the purpo e of determining if you are under 
the influence of alcohol or drugs. U you refuse 
this testing, your Georgia driver's license or 
privilege to drive on the highways of this state 
wilJ be suspended for a minimum period of one 
year. Your refusal to submit to blood or urine 
testing may be offered into evidence at trial. U 
you submit to testing and the results indicate a 
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) at or above 
the legal limit, your Georgia driver's license or 
privilege to drive on the highways of this state 
may be suspended for a minimum period of 
one year. After first ubmitting to the required 
state tests, you are entitled to additional chemi­
cal tests of your blood, breath, urine, or other 
bodily substances at your own expense and 
from qualified personnel of your own choosing. 
SECffON 10: LOSING YOUR DRIVING PRWILEGES ---
Violation Resulting in Conviction 
Violation of Hands Free Law - 1st Conviction 
Child Restraint-1st Offense 
HOV Lane Violation - 4th and Subsequent Offense 
Violation of Hands Free Law - 2nd Conviction 
Possessing an Open Container of an Alcoholic Beverage While Driving 
Speeding-15-18 mph over the posted speed limit 
Child Restraint - 2'1'i and Subsequent Offense 
Failure to Adequately Secure a Load 
Violation of Hands Free Law - 3rd or more Convictions 
Impeding Traffic 
Disobedience of Any Traffic-Control Device or Traffic Officer 
Speeding-19-23 mph over the posted speed limit 
All Other Moving Violations 
Reckless Driving 
Improper Passing on Hill or Curve 
Speeding - 24-33 mph over the posted speed limit 
Aggressive Driving 
Speeding - 34 mph or more over the posted speed limit 
Unlawful Passing School Bus 
 
C) 
0 
Before Visiting 
Fill out your form. 
Points 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
6 
6 
6 
Anytime. Anywhere. Any device. 
Fill out the form for your Permit, License or ID 
Card at this link https://dds.drives.ga.gov/ _j 
before arriving at any of our Customer Service 
Centers. 
0 
□ 
FASTER · SECURE · CONVENIENT · 24/7 
Please remember to bring your parent or guardian and proof 
o f  school enrollment when you come in for your visit. 

--sECTION 10: LOSING YOUR DRIVING PRIVILEGES
The Points System 
The Department is required by law to sus­
pend the Georgia license of an individual for an 
accumulation of points resulting from certain 
convictions. Points are assessed against Georgia 
residents for out-of-state violations which would 
be assessed points if committed within Georgia. 
Georgia licenses will be suspended as follows: 
• For any person who accumulates 15 or more
points within 24 months;
• For any person under the age of 21 with a
conviction for any 4-point violation;
• For any person under 18 years of age with
an accumulation of 4 points within twelve
months.
Points are accumulated on a person's driving
record as a result of certain convictions. The 
adjacent chart lists these convictions and the 
number of points associated with each. The date 
the violation occurred is used as the basis for 
determining the 24-month period (or 12-month 
period for persons under age 18). When a license 
is suspended due to an accumulation of points, 
the point total is restored to zero. 
In the case of a person age 18 up to 21, the 
suspension of the license for a single 4-point 
offense is determined by the date the convic­
tion occurred. A plea of nolo contendere is con­
sidered a conviction for purposes of imposing 
suspensions that apply to persons under age 21. 
Points Reduction 
Licensed Georgia residents may request that 
DDS reduce the number of points assessed 
against their Georgia driver's license up to 7 
points once every 5 years. 
To qualify for a points reduction, you must 
successfully complete a certified 6-hour driver 
improvement (defensive driving) course and 
present the original certificate ofcompletion 
to the DDS by mail or in person at one of our 
Customer Service Centers. 
If you request a points reduction by mail, 
please mail the original driver improvement 
(defensive driving) certificate o f  c ompletion 
to the Georgia Department of Driver Services, 
P.O. Box 80447, Conyers, Georgia 30013. A list of 
certified driver improvement (defensive driv­
ing) courses can be found at the following link: 
https:/ / online.dds.ga.gov/ ddsgeorgiagov/ 
locations/ driver-improvement-schoo Is. aspx. 
Points Avoidance 
A defendant may successfully complete a 
certified 6-hour driver improvement (defensive 
driving) course after the issuance of a citation 
for a moving violation and prior to the court 
appearance, or as ordered by the court When 
the original certificate of completion is pre­
sented to the court, the court shall reduce the 
fine assessed by 20 percent and no points shall 
be assessed against the driver. This plea may 
be accepted by the court once every five years. 
Safety Responsibility Law 
The purpose of this law is to remove irre­
sponsible drivers from Georgia highways and 
to protect insured motorists from uninsured 
motorists. In the event you should fail to sat­
isfy a claim for damage resulting from a motor 
vehicle crash, and a claim is 6Jed against you 
under the Safety Responsibility Law, you will 
receive an order suspending your license. 
To avoid the suspension, you may: 
• Have your insurance carrier file Form SR-21
with the DDS if you were covered by liability
insurance at the time of the crash; or
• File either a general or a conditional release
that has been signed by the claimant (injured
party in the crash) with the DDS; or
• Post security to cover the damages with the
DDS, which may be a cashier's check, certi­
fied check, money order, real property bond
or surety bond, in addition to posting of fi­
nancial responsibility, Form SR-22A.
Any security or bond posted with the Depart­
ment will be held for one year and thereafter 
until proof is furnished to the Department that 
you have not been sued as a result of the crash. 
You are entitled to a hearing, if desired, and 
if requested within ten (10) days of the receipt 
of the order of suspension. 
Mandatory Revocations 
Your driver's license will be revoked in Geor­
gia if any of the following occur: 
• You are declared a Habitual Violator based
upon the third conviction of any combination 
of these offenses within 5 years:
» Driving under the Influence (DUI);
» Homicide by vehicle;
» Felicide by vehicle;
» Serious injury by vehicle;
» Hit and run or leaving the scene of a crash;
» Racing;
» Using a motor vehicle in fleeing or at­
tempting to elude an officer;
» Reckless Stunt Driving
» Operating a motor vehicle with a sus­
pended, canceled, or revoked registration;
» Any felony in the commission of which a
motor vehicle is used; or 
• Refusal to submit to a re-examination of driv­
ing skills or knowledge of driving rules after
receiving notice giving reasonable grounds
for such a request;
• Jf you have been declared incompetent or if 
there is sufficient evidence that you are un­
safe to drive, due to mental health or physical
disability or disease, or by alcohol or drug
addiction.
If you are declared a Habitual Violator, you may
be eligible for a Probationary License after serving 
two years of the revocation period. 
Limited Driving Permits 
In some situations, a limited driving permit 
may be available for a fee of $32 during the sus-
48 
f l
► 
pension period. A limited driving permit would 
allow you to only: 
• Drive to your place of employment;
• Receive scheduled medical attention or ob­
tain prescribed drugs;
• Attend classes at a college or school in whkh
you are enro!Jed as a student;
• Attend regularly scheduled sessions or meet­
ings of support organiZations for the treat­
ment of alcohol or other drugs;
• Attend a driver education program or alco­
hol/drug assessment and treatment program;
• Attend court, report to a probation office or
officer, or perform commwlity service;
• Transport unlicensed immediate family
members to work, medical care and to obtain
prescriptions, and to school
The Department may also specify the places
you may travel to, specific routes of travel, times 
of travel, and indicate vehicles, or other restric­
tions deemed necessary. Limited driving permits 
are not valid for driving a commercial vehicle. 
A limited driving permit will be revoked by 
the Department if you arc convicted of violating 
any state law or local ordinance relating to the 
movement of vehicles or if you are convicted 
of violating any of the conditions or restric­
tions of your permit. In addition, a conviction 
will extend the underlying suspension of your 
driving privilege for an additional 6 months. 
Limited driving permits arc not available for 
convictions of the following offenses or in the 
following situations: 
• Implied Consent refusal (may be available if
no prior DUI conviction within past 5 years);
• No Insurance convictions;
• Driving while license suspended convictions;
• Failure to pay super speeder fee;
• Failure to pay child support;
• Failure to appear in court or respond to a
citation;
• Medical revocation;
• Safety responsibility;
• Parent requested revocation;
• DUIDrugs
• DUJ convictions prior to age 21; and
• Refusal to weigh (CMV).
A limited driving permit may be available
in the following situations, depending on your 
age and the number of convictions on your 
driving record: 
• 1st DUI (non-drugs);
• 2nd DU! conviction in 5 years;
• DUIAIS;
• Under 21 speeding violation but only if age
18 or older, speeding was 24-33 mph over
the posted speed limit, and approved by the
sentencing court judge;

• 1st or 2nd suspension for accumulation of
15 or more points within a 24 month period;
• 3rd controlled substance violation after a 2
year suspension and age 21 or over;
• Homicide by vehicle 2nd Degree (age 21 or 
over); 
• Any felony in the commission of which a
motor vehicle is used (age 21 or over);
• Using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting
to elude an officer (age 21 or over);
• Fraudulent or fictitious use of, or application 
for, a license/ID card (age 21 or over);
• Hit and run or leaving the scene of a a·ash
(age 21 or over);
• Racing (age 21 or over);
• Operating a motor vehicle with a revoked,
canceled, or suspended registration (age 21
or over);
• If approved by the sentencing Court Judge
involving license suspensions for certain
drug offenses
In all cases, the Department will make
the final determination of eligibility for a 
limited driving permit Please contact DDS 
at 678-413-8400 for further infonnation. 
Commercial Driving 
Disqualifications 
When commercial driving privileges are dis­
qualified, the licensee is prohibited from operat­
ing a Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV). Com­
mercial driving privileges can be disqualified 
even if you do not have a commercial driver's 
license (CDL). lf you do not have a CDL, but your 
commercial driving privileges are disqualified, 
you will not be eligible to obtain a COL during 
the period of the disqualification. 
The commercial driving privileges can be 
withdrawn for: 
• Conviction of a Major traffic violation;
•
onviction of two or more Serious traffic
violations;
• Use of a CMV in the commission of any felo­
ny involving a controlled substance or mari­
juana (other than mer felony possession);
• Violation of an out-of-service order; or
• Conviction of a railroad grade crossing of­
fense in a CMV.
Major Traffic Violations 
The commercial driving privileges of any 
person convicted of one of the following "major 
traffic violations" in this state, or any other state, 
in a commercial or, unless otherwise specified, 
a noncommercial vehicle will be disqualified 
for one year: 
• Driving a CMV if your BAC is .04 gm. or
higher;
• DUI; 
• Hit and run or leaving the scene of a crash;
SECffON 10: LOSING YOUR DRIVING PRIVILEGES -
• Failure to report striking an unattended
vehicle;
• Failure to report striking a fixed object;
• Failure to report a crash;
• Any felony in the commission of which a
motor vehicle is used;
• Driving a CMV while the CDL is revoked,
suspended, canceled, or disqualified;
• Homicide by vehicle;
• Racing;
• Using a motor vehicle in Aeeing or attempting 
to elude an officer; 
• Fraudulent or fictitious use of, or application
for, a license/ID card;
• Operating a motor vehicle with a revoked,
canceled, or suspended registration;
• Commercial vehicle cargo theft; or
• Refusal to submit to state administered
chemical testing when requested by a law
enforcement officer.
If convicted of any of these offenses while
you arc operating a CMV that is placarded for 
hazardous materials, you will be disqualified 
from driving a CMV for at least three years for 
a first offense. 
A second conviction from a separate incident 
of any of these major traffic violations will re­
sult in a lifetime disqualification of cnmmercia1 
driving privileges. 
Serious Traffic Violations 
Your commercial driving privileges will be 
disqualified for a period of 60 days upon a sec­
ond conviction in three years for a serious traffic 
violation (provided that the two convictions 
arose from separate incidents). Your commer­
cial driving privileges will be disqualified for a 
period of 120 days upon a third or subsequent 
conviction in three years for a serious traffic 
violation (provided that the various convictions 
arose from separate incidents). 
The following violations are defined as "seri­
ous traffic violations" when committed in this 
state, or any other state, when operating either a 
CMV or, unless otherwise specified, a noncom­
mercial motor vehicle: 
• Speeding 15 or more miles per hour above
the posted speed limit;
• Reckless driving;
• Following another vehicle too closely;
• Improper or erratic lane change, including
failure to signal a lane change;
• A violation of state law or a local ordinance
relating to motor vehicle traffic control aris­
ing in connection with a fatal a-ash, excluding 
parking, weight, length, height, and vehicle
defect violations, and excluding homicide
by vehicle;
• A railroad grade crossing violation in a non­
commercial motor vehicle;
• Driving a commercial motor vehicle without
obtaining a commercial driver's license;
• Driving a commercial motor vehicle without
a commercial driver's license in your imme­
diate possession, but not if it is because your
commercial driving privileges have been sus­
pended, revoked, canceled, or disquali£ied;
• Driving a commercial motor vehicle without
a commercial driver's license of the proper
class and endorsements for the specific ve­
hicle you are operating or for the passengers
or type of cargo you are transporting;
• Use of a wireless device for text based com­
munications while operating a commercial
motor vehicle.
Other Violations 
A felony conviction involving the manufac­
turing, distribution, trafficking or possession 
of a controlled substance or marijuana using a 
CMV (other than mere felony possession) will 
result in a lifetime disqualification of commer­
cial driving privileges. 
Violation of an out-of-service order will result 
in a disqualification of: 
• not less than 180 days and not more than one
year for a 1st offense;
• not less than 2 years and not more than 5
years for a 2nd offense; and
• not less than 3 years and not more than 5
years for a 3rd or subsequent incidents.
An additional disqualification period will
apply when an out-of-service order is violated 
while transporting hazardous materials or 
transporting more than 15 passengers. 
Conviction of any railroad grade crossing 
offense while operating a CMV will also result 
in a disqualification of 60 days for a 1st offense 
up to 1 year for a third or subsequent violation 
within a 3 year period. 

0 =@uiEllJ flil 
CRASHES 
This Section Covers 
H You Are Involved In A Crash ............................. 50 
Aiding the lnjured .......•......................................... .50 
Moving Vehicles Following a Crash ................... 50 
Deer-Automobile Crashes ................................... 50 
If You Are Involved In A Crash 
• Stop immediately in a safo place.
•
otify the near t law enforcement agency
immediately if anyone is injured or killed, or 
if property damage exceeds $500.00; 
• Provide reasonable assistance to any person
injured; 
• Warn approaching motori ts if you can do
so without jeopardizing your own safety or 
that of others. Activate your haz.ard lights, if 
possible, and use reflective triangles, when 
available; 
•
ive your name, addre , license plate num­
ber, and driver's license number to anyone 
else who was involved in the crash. Get the 
same information from the other driver; 
• lf you damage an unattended vehicle, you
mu t either locate the owner or leave your 
name, address, and the name of the owner 
of the vehicle you were driving, in a con­
spicuous place where the owner will find it. 
Aiding the Injured 
I moved the vehicles, nor does moving the ve­
_________________ hides affect their ability to file a written report 
Do not assume that a person is not injured 
simply because that person says he/she is not. 
Send for profossional help as soon as possible. 
Unskilled handling can cause further and more 
severe injurie . Do not move or lift the victim 
unless it is absolutely necessary. Tf the victim 
is moved, get help and try to maintain the vic­
tim in the position in which they were found. 
Stop serious bleeding with thick cloth pads, 
as clean as possible, applied with pressure by 
hand. Keep the victim warm. over the victim 
with blankets or coats, if necessary. 
Georgia has a Good Samaritan Law. This 
law holds any person harmless for civil dam­
ages arising as a result of any act or omission 
in rendering emergency care. 
Moving Vehicles 
Following a Crash 
When a traffic crash occurs on a multilane 
highway or expre sway, and if th re i no ap­
parent serious injury or death, it is the duty of 
the drivers of the vehicles involved to move their 
vehicles from the roadway to a safe location 
along the shoulder, emergency lane, median, or 
any other safe refuge. Driver should only do 
this if the vehicles are capable of being driven 
normally and successfully, and driving the ve­
hicles will not present any further hazard or 
harm to the vehicles themselves, to the driver, 
to persons nearby, or to the roadway. 
If the person involved in the crash are inca­
pable of moving the vehicle , they are autho­
rized to requestany other driverin the vicinity 
who has a valid license of the appropriate class 
to move their vehicles, and the other driver is 
authorized to comply. 
Drivers who take these important tep will 
not be con idered at fault simply because they 
with a local police agency. Moving a vehicle 
in this situation does not allow for the driver 
to be accused of failing to stop and provide 
information. 
Deer-Automobile Crashes 
Each year, deer cause thousands of crashes 
in Georgia. Understanding common habits of 
deer and knowing what to do when a deer runs 
out in front of the car can help to avoid serious 
era hes. Automobile era h data from the Geor­
gia Department of Transportation indicate that 
though deer-automobile crashes are on the rise, 
they till account for less than six percent of 
automobile era he reported ea h year. 
It is important to remember that deer are wild 
animals and their actions are unpredictable. The 
deer you see ca Im ly standing on the side of the 
road may bolt toward the road rather than away 
from it if startled by a car. 
Follow th e guidelin 
to minimize the 
chances of a crash with a deer: 
• Ln areas with known deer populations, d riv­
ers should constantly scan the road a11d road 
shoulders for deer movements and sightings; 
• Always low down when a deer crosses the
road in front of you or another car. Deer usu­
ally travel in groups and it is likely that there 
is another one following closely behind; 
• lf a deer is spotted on the road or road ide at
night, the driver should low down immedi­
ately, blink his/her headlight and switch to 
low beam so as not to blind the deer; 
• Also, short horn blasts may help scare the
deer from the road. 
hould the deer or other animal run out in 
front of your car, slow down as much as pos­
sible to minimize the damage of a era h. Never 
swerve to avoid a deer. This action may cause 
you to strike another vehicle or leave the road­
way, causing more damage or serious injuries. 
If you do have a era h, police hould be alerted 
as soon as possible. Most insurance companies 
will require an accident report from the police 
before paying claims for this type of crash. 
Deer are usually seen along the roadside 
during the early morning hours and late eve­
ni11g. Drivers should be alert for deer during 
these peak hours. Deeraremostactivein the fall 
months of October, November and December 
during the peak breeding season. Late February 
and early March arealsocritical monthsfordeer­
car era he . During this period they concentrate 
along road shoulders to feed on n w green food 
available following winter. However, deer are 
often spotted at midday during summer months. 
Therefore, it is important for drivers to remain 
cautious when traveling on rural roads or areas 
known to have a high deer population. 
so 
fl 
►


