 
V E R M O N T  
M A N U A L  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2025 
 
Phil Scott, Governor 
State of Vermont 
 
Joe Flynn, Secretary 
Agency of Transportation 
 
Andrew Collier, Commissioner 
Department of Motor Vehicles 
 
D R I V E R ’ S  

1 
 
Organ Donation Saves Lives 
When you apply for your license, you will have an 
opportunity to become a registered donor. 
 
Saying ‘Yes’ can save a life! 
 
Fact: Saying “Yes” to donation will not affect your 
medical care. 
Fact: There is no cost to the donor or their family for 
donation to take place. 
Fact: All major religions support organ and tissue 
donation or view it as an individual’s decision. 
Fact: In the United States, it is illegal to buy or sell organs 
and tissue for transplantation. 
 
You Have the Power to Donate Life! 
For more information visit DonateLifeVT.org 
 
 
 

2 
Study for your Learner’s Permit test and learn to drive safely using our 
web tutorial, DriveVermont. You can use 
DriveVermont to learn the rules of the road and 
how to drive safely while you study for your 
Learner’s Permit test. You can also find out 
what you need to know before you take your 
written or road test.  
 
You'll find DriveVermont packed with helpful 
images and videos. Engaging quizzes will help 
you test yourself on what you have learned. After completing the tutorial, you 
can take a practice exam that will look very similar to the actual test you will be 
taking.  
 
To begin studying for your permit and learning to drive safely visit 
dmv.vermont.gov 
 
 
 
 
The Department of Motor Vehicles does not discriminate against individuals with 
disabilities in the provision of services, programs, activities or employment. 
 
The Department of Motor Vehicles will make reasonable accommodations available 
when a person’s disability significantly interferes with their ability to understand 
information presented for obtaining a Learner’s Permit or a Driver’s License. 
 
If, for example, your disability limits your ability to read and understand written 
language, you can the audio or online interactive versions of this manual which are 
available on our website. If you feel that the Department of Motor Vehicles has not 
provided you with a reasonable accommodation for your disability, you can file a 
complaint with the Vermont Human Rights Commission by calling 800.416.2010. 
 
If you have trouble reading or have a disability that inhibits your reading ability, let us 
know when you make your appointment. We will work with you to accommodate your 
needs. 
 
The learner permit test is no longer taken in our office. It is an online test available on 
our website, mydmv.vermont.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VN-007 07/2024 MTC 

3 
Safety Message from the Commissioner 
 
Your decision to obtain a Learner’s Permit or a 
Driver’s License carries with it, one of life’s greatest 
social responsibilities. You are committing to: 
maintaining a safe operating vehicle that meets 
Vermont’s emissions standards, carrying liability 
insurance, always obeying the rules of the road, and 
adopting habits that eliminate driving distractions. 
 
Vehicle collisions are the leading cause of 
hospitalization and death from injuries.  People of all 
ages are affected, whether they are the driver, 
passenger, or family member of a victim of one of 
these crashes. 
 
Having a license is a privilege; one that is earned by 
demonstrating your driving skills in a manner that 
shows you are a proficient and safe driver.  
 
Retaining that privilege requires your continuing to operate your vehicle in a safe and 
responsible manner. 
 
We will try to make your driving test a positive experience even though we recognize the 
anxiety associated with being tested. 
 
Remember you share the highway with everyone else. AVOID DISTRACTIONS AND 
DRIVE SAFELY. 
 
 
 
Andrew Collier 
Commissioner 
 
This manual is produced by the Vermont Department of Motor Vehicles and printed in Vermont. 
Please help reduce the cost to state government by returning this manual or passing it on to another 
future driver. 
 
 
 
 
THIS MANUAL MAY NOT BE USED DURING THE TEST 
 
 

4 
Contents 
Chapter 1 - General Information ..................................................................... 5 
Chapter 2 - How to Lose Your License .......................................................... 7 
Chapter 3 – Proof of Identity .......................................................................... 8 
Chapter 4 – General License Information ..................................................... 12 
Questions and Answers About Learner’s Permits ................................ 12 
Questions and Answers About Junior Driver’s Licenses ..................... 13 
Questions and Answers About Driver’s Licenses ................................ 16 
Chapter 5 - Graduated Driver’s License Program ........................................ 20 
Chapter 6 – Fees, Renewals & Replacements............................................... 23 
Chapter 7 - Driving Safely and Studying for Your Permit ........................... 25 
How to Drive Safely ............................................................................. 25 
Parking Your Vehicle ........................................................................... 29 
Roundabouts ......................................................................................... 29 
Police Stops .......................................................................................... 30 
Move Over Law ................................................................................... 31 
Traffic Lights, Road Signs, and Highway Markings ........................... 31 
Road Signs ........................................................................................... 32 
Sharing the Road .................................................................................. 37 
Hazardous Driving Conditions ............................................................. 46 
Interstate Driving ................................................................................. 50 
Impaired Driving .................................................................................. 52 
Distracted Driving ................................................................................ 54 
The Road (Skills) Test ......................................................................... 56 
Chapter 8 - Point System .............................................................................. 64 
Chapter 9 – Vehicle Ownership .................................................................... 65 
Chapter 10 – Commercial Driver’s License ................................................. 70 
Chapter 11 - Persons with Disabilities .......................................................... 71 
Chapter 12 – Parents or Guardians ............................................................... 73 
 
 

5 
Chapter 1 - General Information 
 
VERMONT STATE HOLIDAYS 
 
New Year's Day 
 
 
January 1st 
 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day 
 
3rd Monday in January 
Presidents’ Day 
 
 
3rd Monday in February 
Town Meeting Day 
 
 
1st Tuesday in March 
Memorial Day 
 
 
Last Monday in May 
Independence Day 
 
 
July 4th  
Bennington Battle Day 
 
August 16th 
 
Labor Day 
 
 
 
1st Monday in September 
Veterans' Day 
 
 
November 11th 
 
Thanksgiving Day 
 
 
4th Thursday in November 
Day After Thanksgiving 
 
Friday after Thanksgiving 
Christmas Day 
 
 
December 25th 
 
 
All offices are closed on the above dates, and on the observed dates as outlined below. 
 
A holiday which falls on a Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday. A holiday 
which falls on a Sunday shall be observed on the following Monday. 
 
An examiner may not always be present due to road testing. Please be patient. An 
examiner will assist you as soon as possible. 
 
On occasion it may be necessary to cancel or postpone driver testing due to poor road 
conditions. Call 802.828.2000 or visit mydmv.vermont.gov to reschedule, if necessary. 
 
 
Prepared by: 
 
 
 
Department of Motor Vehicles 
120 State Street 
Montpelier, Vermont 05603-0001 
dmv.vermont.gov 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
OFFICE LOCATIONS 
Bennington 
Bennington County 
530 Main St 
Dummerston 
Windham County 
AOT District #2 Office,  
Route 5 
Montpelier 
Washington County - Main Office 
120 State Street  
Newport 
Orleans County 
100 Main Street 
Saint Albans 
Franklin County 
27 Fisher Pond Rd 
Saint Johnsbury 
Caledonia County 
Green Mtn Mall,  
1998 Memorial Dr 
South Burlington 
Chittenden County 
4 Market Street 
Springfield 
Windsor County 
100 Mineral St, Suite 103 
Rutland 
Rutland County 
101 State Place 
White River Junction 
Windsor County 
221 Beswick Drive 
 
 
All office visits are by appointment only. 
To schedule an appointment, visit 
mydmv.vermont.gov or call 888.970.0357 
 
 
Contact 
dmv.vermont.gov/contact 
facebook.com/VermontDMV 
802.828.2000 
888 99-VERMONT (888-998-3766) 
Hearing Impaired Dial 711 
 
 
 
 

7 
Chapter 2 - How to Lose Your License 
 
How Can You Lose Your License Or Driving Privilege?  
 
7 V.S.A. § 656 - Minors misrepresenting age, procuring, possessing, or consuming 
liquors; first offense; civil violation 
 
If caught and ticketed, you will be required to contact the Teen Alcohol Safety 
Program (TASP) of Vermont Court Diversion (failure to contact the diversion board 
within 15 days will result in the case being referred to the judicial bureau, where the 
person, if found liable for the violation, will be subject to a penalty of $300.00 and a 90-
day suspension of the person's Driver’s License, and may face substantially increased 
insurance rates) and participate in an alcohol abuse evaluation, follow the 
recommendations of the counselor and other requirements. All of these programs require 
additional fees. In addition if you fail to complete TASP or other Diversion requirements, 
your license or privilege to drive will be SUSPENDED. Additional fees will be due to 
DMV in order to be reinstated. 
 
  
23 V.S.A. § 202 - Impersonating Another In An Application, Or Aiding An 
Applicant By False Representation 
 
A person who falsely impersonates another in an application for Driver’s License or 
Learner’s Permit, or in an application for a non-driver identification card, or in an 
application for motor vehicle registration, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or motorboat 
registration, or vessel validation, or who obtains a license to operate a motor vehicle by 
false representation, or who obtains a Learner’s Permit or non-driver identification card 
by false representation, or who obtains a motor vehicle registration or a registration for 
any other type of vehicle or vessel by false representation, or who uses an assumed name 
or name not his or her own in an application for Driver’s License, or Learner’s Permit or 
in an application for non-driver identification card, or in an application for motor vehicle 
registration, or registration for any other type vehicle or vessel, or who knowingly aids 
an applicant in obtaining such license, permit, registration or non-driver identification 
card by false representation as to the age or identity of such applicant, shall be fined not 
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than two years, or both and shall have his or 
her privilege to operate suspended for 90 days. 
 
PROBLEM DRIVER POINTER SYSTEM 
 
Upon application for a Learner’s Permit, Junior Driver’s License or Driver’s License, 
an inquiry will be made of the national Problem Driver Pointer System (PDPS). If the 
results of the PDPS inquiry indicate you are suspended, revoked, denied, or canceled in 
another state, you will be denied the issuance of a Vermont Driver's License, Learner’s 
Permit or Junior Driver’s License until such time as we receive proof you have been 
reinstated or cleared in that state. If you have been suspended, revoked, denied, or 
cancelled in another state, you may not be tested or obtain a Driver’s License. 
 
 
 

8 
Chapter 3 – Proof of Identity 
 
You will need documentation from each of the 4 categories below: 
1. Identity and Date of Birth 
2. Social Security Information 
3. Vermont Residency and Current Address 
4. Lawful Status in the United States (Only required for Real ID & EDL) 
 
Note: 
 Documents must be original, or copies certified by the issuing agency. Faxed or 
photocopied documents will NOT be accepted. 
 Documents are subject to departmental review and approval. Additional information 
may be required. 
 In some cases, document approval may not occur in the same day and may require an 
additional visit. 
 Original documents provided to DMV will be returned to the applicant and may be 
imaged and stored in a secure database.  
 If your name is different than what’s indicated on your documents, you must provide 
proof of legal change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, court order, etc.) 
Identity and date of birth: 
Must provide one of the following: 
 Valid, unexpired passport 
 A certified record of the applicant's birth, marriage, adoption, or divorce, including a 
translation if necessary 
 Consular Report of Birth Abroad (CRBA) issued by the U.S. Department of State 
(Form FS-240, DS-1350 or FS-545) 
 Valid consular identification document issued by the government of Mexico, 
Guatemala (or any other government with comparable security standards and 
protocols, as determined by the Commissioner) 
 Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551) 
 Certificate of Naturalization issued by DHS (Form N-550 or Form N-570) 
 Certificate of Citizenship (Form N-560 or Form N-561) issued by DHS 
 Real ID Driver’s License or Identification Card issued in compliance with the 
standards established by 6 CFR part 37 
 If the name on the license is/will be other than the name that appears on a primary 
source document (for example, through marriage, adoption, court order, or other 
mechanism permitted by State law or regulation), evidence of the name change 
through the presentation of documents issued by a court, governmental body or other 
entity as determined by the Commissioner is required. DMV will maintain copies of 
the documentation presented and maintain a record of both the recorded name and the 
name on the primary source documents. 
Note: Additional documentation may be required at the DMV's discretion if the 
documentation submitted is questionable or if there is reason to believe the person is not 
who they claims to be. The driver's license personnel will determine if the documents 

9 
provided from this list are authentic, valid, and acceptable. Photocopies and faxes of 
documents will NOT be accepted. 
Enhanced Driver’s License (EDL) requires Proof of US Citizenship: 
U.S. citizens returning from Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, or Bermuda, by land or 
sea, are required to present a U.S. Passport, U.S. Passport Card or an Enhanced Driver's 
License (EDL). An EDL requires proof of US Citizenship in addition to proof of Identity, 
SSN and Vermont Residency. 
Social Security Information 
You must present your Social Security card or a letter from the Social Security 
Administration indicating ineligibility to receive a Social Security number (SSN). 
If your Social Security card is not available, one of the following forms may be used 
in its place: 
 W-2 form, 
 SSA-1099 form, 
 pay stub showing name and SSN (minimum of last 4 digits) 
 
Corrected Information / Name Change 
Your name must verify with Social Security Administration. If you need to correct or 
update information at the Social Security Administration, do so before you visit DMV. 
You must bring your updated Social Security card with you when applying for a 
corrected Driver's License or ID card in your new name. For information on how to do 
this, visit socialsecurity.gov. 
 
Replacement Social Security Card 
The Social Security Administration offers online services for residents of Vermont 
available through the Social Security online portal. This allows people to replace their 
SSN card from the comfort of their home or office, without the need to travel to a Social 
Security office. For information on how to do this, visit socialsecurity.gov. 
 
Foreign Nationals 
If you are a temporary foreign national not authorized for employment, you are 
required to present documentation from Social Security Administration verifying you do 
not have an SSN. Vermont DMV will verify your USCIS number. The Vermont DMV 
will not issue a Driver's License or ID if you have less than 30 days of Lawful Presence 
remaining. The Vermont DMV will electronically verify your name, date of birth and, 
SSN with the Social Security Administration. Make sure your document is up to date and 
accurate to avoid delay. 
 

10 
Vermont Residency & Current Address 
To obtain a new Vermont Driver's License, Enhanced Driver's License, Learner's 
Permit, Non-Driver ID, or Commercial Driver's License applicants must provide proof 
of residency in Vermont. In addition, applicants with an out-of-state physical address will 
be required to prove Vermont residency upon renewal of any of the above documents. 
The residential address you supply must be a street or highway address. It may not 
be a post office box. In areas where a number and street name have not been assigned, an 
address convention used by the U.S. Postal Service is acceptable. You may use a post 
office box as your mailing address. 
If mail is received at the street address: 
 Two pieces of mail with current name and street address. 
If mail is not received at the street address, provide any two (2) of the following which 
show street address: 
 Utility bill (must list service address). 
 Property tax bill with physical location. 
 Lease or Landlord statement. 
 Vermont EBT (Electronic Benefit Transfer) card or Vermont AIM (Advanced 
Information Management) identification card. 
 Homeowners/Renters insurance (policy/proof of claim). 
 If the applicant resides with others and gets no mail at their street address: 
 Completed Vermont Residency Certification and submit with application. 
U.S. Military, Active Duty 
 If residing in Vermont, see above. 
 If residing out-of-state, military ID and proof Vermont is their residence in 
military records, such as Leave and Earnings Statement or orders. 
Minors 
 Vermont Residency Certification and one (1) parent residency document from 
above. 
 Parent/Guardian evidence of relationship to applicant. 
Residency Requirements for a Vermont Learner’s Permit 
To prove Vermont residency, the applicant must provide the Department with one of 
the documents indicated above. If the applicant is a minor, the parent/guardian will be 
required to provide one of the residency documents. 
If the applicant is not a Vermont resident, he/she may only obtain a Vermont 
Learner’s Permit for the purpose of participating in a driver education and training 
course. The applicant must provide the Department with one of the following: 
 A letter from a school Guidance Counselor stating the student/applicant is to be 
enrolled in a driver education course, or 

11 
 A letter from a Driver Education School indicating the applicant/student is 
enrolled in a class. 
Lawful Status in the United States (Required for Real ID & EDL 
only) 
In most cases, the documents required for proof of identity and date of birth will also 
establish lawful status in the United States. Foreign nationals must provide a passport 
and visa, alien registration receipt card (green card), or other proof of legal presence for 
inspection and copying. 
The Vermont DMV uses a U.S. Department of Homeland Security program known 
as Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) to electronically verify 
immigration documents issued by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security or U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services. 
 If applying for an Enhanced License (EDL) Proof of US Citizenship is required.   
 Proof of Lawful Status must have a minimum of 30 days remaining. 
Driver’s Privilege Card 
A Driver Privilege Card is a Vermont license or permit that is NOT Real ID 
compliant. 
The Driver Privilege Card is available to anyone that is a Vermont Resident. Issuance 
of the DPC does not require proof of legal presence or US citizenship. 
Self-Designated Descriptors 
The following are self-designated descriptors for a Vermont Driver’s License or Non-
Driver Identification card. 
 Height 
 Weight 
 Eye color 
 Gender 
Applicants are not required under Vermont or federal law to present documentation 
that confirms the information they submit for these entries. 

12 
Chapter 4 – General License Information 
 
Licenses 
If you live in Vermont and plan to drive in Vermont, you must obtain a Vermont 
driver's license. A person who has moved into the state from another jurisdiction with a 
valid license from that state shall obtain a Vermont license within 60 days of moving into 
the state.  
In accordance with state and federal law, any person holding a commercial driver’s 
license from another state must transfer their commercial driver’s license within 30 days 
of establishing residency in Vermont. 
The act of licensing makes driving a privilege, and holding a license requires that you 
drive within the limits of the law and treat all users of the highway, including bicyclists, 
motorcyclists, and pedestrians with courtesy and consideration. 
Your influence on the lives of others is greatly expanded, as is your responsibility 
when you get into the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle. The license examination tests your 
knowledge and skills. It is your responsibility to drive safely and responsibly. 
Types of Licenses  
 
Learner’s Permit 
 
Driver’s License 
 
Junior Driver’s License 
 
Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) 
 
Enhanced Driver's License (EDL) 
 
Driver’s Privilege Card
Questions and Answers about Learner’s Permits 
Who needs a Learner’s Permit? 
If you are a Vermont resident and want to drive in Vermont, you will have to get a 
Vermont Learner’s Permit. You must be at least 15 years old to take the test. A resident 
of another State enrolled in a Vermont Driver Education & Training course can also 
obtain a Vermont Learner's Permit (A letter from the school confirming enrollment will 
be required). 
What do I need to do to get a Learner’s Permit?  
1. If you are 15, 16 or 17 years old, you need your parent's or legal guardian's permission 
(unless you are an emancipated minor). A parent or legal guardian must sign the 
application before you can take the test. If you are a foreign exchange student, you 
may obtain a Foreign Exchange Parental Authorization Form (VL-036) to be signed 
by a parent or legal guardian. A host parent cannot sign. 
2. Your permit will be issued after you pass the online permit test and pay the required 
fees. 
To apply for a Learner’s Permit, an individual under the age of 18 must have 
maintained a ‘clean’ driving record in the previous two (2) years.  If you have had any 
recalls, suspensions, or revocations, contact DMV as you may be required to serve an 
additional waiting period. 

13 
When and Where can I drive with a Permit? 
With a valid Learner’s Permit, you may drive anywhere, anytime in Vermont if there 
is a licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired 
driver education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age or 
older riding in the front seat. Before driving in any other state, you must contact that 
state’s Motor Vehicle Department or law enforcement agency to see if it is legal to drive 
in that state with a Vermont Learner’s Permit.  
Questions and Answers about Junior Driver’s Licenses 
Who can get a Junior Driver’s License? 
An individual must have maintained a ‘clean’ driving record without any Learner’s 
Permit recalls, suspensions, or revocations for a six (6) month period prior to obtaining a 
Junior Driver’s License. 
An individual must possess a Learner’s Permit for at least one (1) year prior to 
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License.  
A Junior Driver’s License is issued to persons 16 or 17 years old who pass the 
required examination. Your parent or legal guardian must sign your application giving 
permission for you to be tested. 
Before getting a license, all 16- and 17-year old’s must have passed a state approved 
driver education and training course consisting of 30 hours of classroom study, 6 hours 
behind the wheel training and 6 hours of observation. The Vermont Agency of Education, 
Driver Education Division, oversees driver education courses at high schools. There are 
also Vermont commercial driver training schools that offer driver training courses. In 
addition to the hours indicated above, you must complete 40 hours of driving practice, 
with at least 10 hours being nighttime driving. Nighttime driving is considered driving 
during the period of 30 minutes after sunset, to 30 minutes before sunrise. 
What Do I need to get a Junior Driver’s License? 
1. A Vermont Learner’s Permit that is not expired. A person may take a road test if their 
Learner’s Permit has not been expired more than 3 years and has been renewed prior 
to the exam. If it has been expired more than 3 years a written exam would be required 
before the road test can be given. 
2. Successful completion of a driver education course certified by the Vermont Agency 
of Education or the Vermont Department of Motor Vehicles. Your instructor must 
have logged your completion in the Driver Education Certification Service before a 
Driving Test can be administered. Out-of-state driver’s education is only acceptable 
if the course was taught by a certified and/or licensed driver education instructor and 
includes both classroom and behind-the-wheel training. If the completion certificate 
was not issued by a state agency, the applicant must provide documentation on state 
letterhead from the appropriate agency indicating that a recognized driver education 
program issued the certificate, and must list the minimum requirements for successful 
completion of the program. 

14 
3. Your parent or guardian must certify you have completed 40 hours of practice behind 
the wheel, with at least 10 hours being nighttime driving. You can use the Driving 
Practice Log Sheet (form VN-219) or the RoadReady App to track your 
progress. Note: The law requires the 40 hours of driving practice to be in addition to 
the 6 hours of behind-the-wheel driving required for successful completion of driver 
education. 
4. You need your parent's or legal guardian's permission (unless you are an emancipated 
minor). A parent or legal guardian must sign the application before you can take the 
test. If you are a foreign exchange student, you must obtain in advance a Foreign 
Exchange Parental Authorization (form VL-036) to be signed by a parent or legal 
guardian.  Your host parent cannot sign this form. This form is available at Motor 
Vehicles offices. 
5. You must enter your Social Security Number on the application or provide a letter 
from the Social Security Administration indicating your ineligibility to receive a 
Social Security Number. 
6. Schedule an appointment for an exam. 
7. Have a vehicle that is clean, in good mechanical condition, legal, and with a valid 
inspection sticker. Be sure the emergency/parking brake is working properly.  
8. Be prepared: Check for a valid insurance card as required by Vermont Law and 
vehicle registration before arriving for your appointment. Failure to show a valid 
insurance card and a registration certificate will prevent testing. The insurance card 
must state the name of the insurance carrier, effective and expiration dates of 
coverage, the name of the insured, and the description of the vehicle including the 
vehicle identification number. 
9. Your license will be issued after you pass the road test, pay the required fees and 
provide proper identification (see Chapter 3). 
Transferring an Out-of-State Junior Driver’s License (applicants under 18) 
You may convert your out-of-state Junior Driver’s License and obtain a Vermont 
Junior Driver’s License by: (1) successfully passing the required examinations; (2) 
providing proof (see What Do I Need to Get a Junior Driver’s License, #2 above) of 
successful completion of a state approved Driver Education program; (3) providing proof 
of completion of an additional 40 hours of driving. 
If you have a Junior Driver’s License from another state and apply for a Vermont 
Junior Driver’s License you will be subject to Vermont's Graduated License provisions 
unless you have held the Junior Driver’s License in the other state for a period of at least 
six months.  
High School Driver’s License Testing 
Some DMV licensed high school driver education instructors conduct Driver’s 
License road tests. This service is provided only at schools that have enrolled in the 
testing program, and by those instructors who have been certified as examiners by the 

15 
Department of Motor Vehicles. Road tests will be administered only to students who 
attend a participating school. 
A student who passed the road test which was given by the high school driver 
education instructor will be issued a Driver Education Examination Certificate. This 
certificate, valid Vermont Learner’s Permit, license application completed and signed by 
parent or legal guardian, road test and licensing fee, and proof of Vermont residency are 
all required for license issue. These must be submitted in person to any Motor Vehicle 
Customer Service Office. The instructors at participating schools will provide complete 
information regarding this program to students. 
What restrictions are on a Junior Driver’s License? 
A Junior Driver’s License is considered a provisional license. The Commissioner of 
Motor Vehicles may take your license away if you show that you are an unsafe driver 
through your actions. Your license may also be taken away if your parent or guardian 
withdraws their permission for you to drive. 
While holding a Junior Driver’s License, you cannot operate a vehicle in the course 
of your employment for one (1) year following the issuance of the Junior Driver’s 
License.  For example, an individual cannot act as a pizza delivery person (driver) until 
they have had their Junior Driver’s License for one (1) year, or until they reach the age 
of eighteen (18), whichever comes first. 
While holding a Junior Driver’s License, an individual may not carry passengers for 
hire. 
During the first three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the 
individual is restricted to driving alone. Passengers are permitted only if there is a 
licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired driver 
education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age or older 
riding in the front seat. If one (1) of those individuals is in the vehicle, there is no 
restriction on the number of passengers. However, the driver is not allowed to transport 
more passengers than there are safety belts. 
During the second three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the 
individual may begin transporting family members. 
After holding a Junior Driver’s License for six (6) months, there is no restriction on 
the number of passengers they can transport in the vehicle. However the driver is not 
allowed to transport more passengers than there are safety belts. 
A person shall not use any portable electronic device while operating a motor vehicle. 
This includes reading, and the manual composing or sending of electronic 
communications (including text messages, instant messages, and emails). Portable 
electronic devices include, but are not limited to, cellular telephones, personal digital 
assistant (PDA), tablets/iPads and laptop computers. 
 
 

16 
Questions and Answers about Driver’s Licenses 
Who can get a Driver’s License? 
A Driver’s License is issued to eligible individuals 18 years of age or older who pass 
the required examination. This license allows a person to drive any noncommercial 
vehicle except a school bus or motorcycle. To drive a school bus or ride a motorcycle 
additional exams are required. 
How do I get A Driver’s License if I have a valid Learner’s Permit? 
1. Make an appointment for an exam. 
2. Have a licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified 
unimpaired driver education instructor, or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 
years of age or older with you. The license of any accompanying driver must be valid 
at the time of application.  
3. Have a vehicle that is clean and in good mechanical condition with a valid inspection 
sticker. Be sure the emergency/parking brake is working properly. 
4. Proof of current and valid automobile insurance is required by Vermont law. The 
proof must state the name of the insurance carrier, effective and expiration dates of 
coverage, name of insured, description of the vehicle including the vehicle 
identification number. 
5. Proof of valid registration for the vehicle is required. 
6. Your license will be issued after you pass the road test and pay the fees. 
How do I get A Driver’s License if I have a valid license from another state? 
When a new Vermont Resident applies for a Vermont Driver’s License and 
possesses a valid out-of-state license or an out-of-state license that has been expired for 
three (3) year or less, an eye examination will be required. 
1. Bring your valid or expired (3 years or less) license from your home state, proof of 
identity (see chapter 3). If your home state license is not valid, have someone who 
has a valid license drive you to the Department of Motor Vehicles. If your license 
has been expired for more than three (3) years, or you do not have an out-of-state 
license, you will have to take the vision, written and road tests. 
Who May Not Be Issued a New License or Renew an Existing License? 
A person whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any state has been suspended, 
revoked, or refused cannot be issued a license until such suspension, revocation or refusal 
has been terminated and the person has been officially notified in writing of 
reinstatement. 
A license cannot be issued to a person when the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles has 
evidence that such person either cannot or will not operate a motor vehicle without 
endangering the other users of the highway. 
A person who is not a Vermont Resident. 

17 
SCHOOL BUS ENDORSEMENT  
Every Vermont licensed driver, who transports school children in a school bus, must 
have a driver's license with a school bus endorsement. 
 
If you drive a school bus, which has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds 
or more, or which is manufactured to carry 16 or more passengers including the 
driver, you will need a Commercial Driver’s License with passenger and school bus 
endorsements. 
 
If you transport school children in school buses rated by the manufacturer for fewer 
than 16 passengers, you are required to obtain a Type II school bus endorsement on 
your driver’s license. 
 
If you are transporting school children in other vehicles, you may also need a Type II 
school bus endorsement. 
 
If you transport school children in a multifunction school activity bus, owned or 
leased by a school, you need a school bus endorsement. 
 
If you are transporting school children for hire, such as in a taxi, you must have a 
school bus endorsement. 
 
If you are transporting school children in cars or vans owned either privately or by a 
school, you may be required to get a school bus endorsement on your driver’s license. 
You can get a school bus manual by visiting one of our offices. 
MOTORCYCLE ENDORSEMENT & MOTORCYCLE LEARNER’S PERMITS 
Any person 16 years old or older who has a license may get a motorcycle endorsement 
or a motorcycle permit by passing a test. 
You should read the Motorcycle Licensing Guide and Operator’s Manual before 
taking the test. You can get a motorcycle manual by visiting one of our offices. 
MOTORCYCLE RIDER TRAINING PROGRAM 
The Vermont Rider Education Program (VREP) encourages people of all ages who 
are interested in riding a motorcycle to take this training. The training program follows 
nationally recognized safety and training standards and involves both classroom and on-
motorcycle training. Motorcycles, textbooks, and helmets are provided for students 
taking the Basic Rider Course. Students who successfully complete the Course are 
exempt from taking the state written and skill exams required to obtain a motorcycle 
endorsement. For course information visit the Vermont DMV website. 
Do I need an Appointment?    
 
Yes, visit mydmv.vermont.gov to schedule an appointment. All DMV visits are by 
appointment only. If you are unable to keep the scheduled appointment, please cancel or 
reschedule your appointment as soon as possible so that we may make the scheduled time 
available to someone else. Check your proof of valid insurance as required by Vermont 
Law and vehicle registration before arriving at DMV. 

18 
Note:  If you are hearing impaired an interpreter will be provided if requested at the 
time of scheduling an appointment. Vermont Relay Service (TTY) is available by calling 
711.  
Why Does the State Require Driving Tests? 
The tests are used to evaluate the following: 
 Can you read and understand the road signs and lights used on the road? 
 Do you know the laws about driving vehicles in this state? 
 Can you see well enough to drive safely? 
 Do you have the proper driving skills to enable you to be a safe and courteous 
driver? 
 Do you have any disabilities that may affect your ability to operate your vehicle 
safely? 
 Will you properly maintain your vehicle so that it will be safe to drive? 
 Are you willing and do you have the knowledge necessary, to be a safe and 
courteous driver? 
 Are you committed to respecting the rights of bicyclists, motorcyclists, and 
pedestrians as well as other drivers? 
What are the Tests Like? 
1. Vision Test 
Using a vision-screening device, the examiner will test how well you see. If the 
results of the screening determine that your vision does not meet the required 
standards of 20/40, you will be referred to an eye doctor of your choice and expense 
for further testing. The eye doctor will complete an evaluation to determine if any 
restrictions should be placed on your driving privilege. The eye doctor must be a 
licensed optometrist or ophthalmologist. 
2. Knowledge test 
The knowledge test is online and has 20 questions. Each question has four 
answers to choose from, of which only one is correct. You must answer at least 16 
questions correctly to pass the test. If you fail the test, you must wait at least one day 
before taking another one. 
3. Road Test 
The road test will not be given until you have passed all other parts of the test. 
Before the examination, you should have at least 40 hours of actual driving 
experience under the direction of an experienced driver or driving instructor. At least 
five hours of this should be in traffic. Practically every person of average ability with 
sufficient practice, under the supervision of a good instructor, can learn to drive. 

19 
During the road test, you will not be asked to do anything which is against the 
law. No tricks will be played on you. You must follow the directions of the examiner 
who will be riding with you. You will be expected to handle your vehicle with skill, 
drive at proper speeds according to conditions, and obey signs and rules of the road. 
No animals are allowed in the vehicle during a road test. 
If you fail the road test for any reason, you must wait at least one week before 
taking another test. If you fail a road test three times, a minimum waiting period of 
one month is required. 
Do I Have to Furnish a Vehicle for the Driving Test? 
Yes. The vehicle must be registered and inspected. The state in which it is registered 
and inspected does not matter. You must have proof of insurance for the vehicle you use. 
Check your registration, inspection sticker and insurance before arriving for the test. 
Rental vehicles may not be used for road tests unless the rental company provides a 
letter accepting full responsibility if the applicant takes the road test in the rental vehicle. 
Vehicles that are displaying dealer registration are not acceptable unless you are an 
immediate family member of the dealership.  No road test will be given in a vehicle 
displaying agriculture, antique or exhibit plates because these plates, by law, are 
restricted in their use. 
Condition of the Vehicle Used in the Road Test 
You will not be permitted to take the driving test unless the motor vehicle you furnish 
is properly equipped, in good mechanical condition, and properly registered, insured, and 
inspected. The safe operating condition of the vehicle is the responsibility of the operator.  
Proper equipment in good mechanical condition includes: headlights, horn, windshield 
wipers, rearview mirror, tail lights, tires, steering mechanism, windshield, exhaust 
system, brakes, fenders, bumpers and if manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1955, 
directional signals. Safety belts and defrosters are required in 1964 and later models.  No 
road test will be given in a vehicle that does not have safety belts. Emergency/parking 
brakes must be adequate to hold the vehicle in neutral on any grade on which it is 
operated, both with the vehicle headed uphill or downhill. Illegal tinting of the front 
windows of your vehicle is not allowed.  
 
 
 
 

20 
Chapter 5 - Graduated Driver’s License Program 
 
Graduated Driver’s License Program 
 
Individuals who obtain a Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License are subject to 
our Graduated Driver’s License law. The key provisions of this law are indicated below: 
  
1. An individual fifteen (15) years of age or older may operate a motor vehicle if they   
hold a valid Learner’s Permit and are accompanied by one (1) of the following 
people in the vehicle, who is riding beside the driver: 
 
A licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, 
 
A licensed or certified and unimpaired driver education instructor, and/or 
 
A licensed and unimpaired person at least twenty-five (25) years of  age. 
2. To apply for a Learner’s Permit, an individual must have maintained a clean driving 
record in the previous two (2) years 
3. An individual must possess a Learner’s Permit for at least one (1) year prior to 
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License.  
4. Prior to obtaining a Junior Driver’s License, an individual must complete an 
additional forty (40) hours of practice behind the wheel, with at least ten (10) hours 
being nighttime driving, while accompanied by one of the individuals indicated 
above who is riding beside the driver. The forty (40) hours of practice is in addition 
to the six hours of behind the wheel instruction time required for successful 
completion of a driver-training course. This additional practice must be certified by 
one of the individuals indicated above. NOTE: ‘Nighttime driving’ is defined as 
driving during the period of thirty (30) minutes after sunset, to thirty (30) minutes 
before sunrise. 
5. An individual must have maintained a ‘clean’ driving record without any Learner’s 
Permit recalls, suspensions, or revocations for a six (6) month period prior to 
obtaining a Junior Driver’s License. 
6. While holding a Junior Driver’s License, the individual may not operate a vehicle in 
the course of their employment for one (1) year following the issuance of the Junior 
Driver’s License. For example, an individual cannot act as a pizza delivery driver 
until having had a Junior Driver’s License for one (1) year, or until reaching the age 
of eighteen (18), whichever comes first. 
7. While holding a Junior Driver’s License, an individual may not carry passengers for 
hire. 
8. During the first three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the 
individual is restricted to driving alone. Passengers are permitted only if there is a 
licensed and unimpaired parent or guardian, or a licensed or certified unimpaired 
driver education instructor or a licensed and unimpaired individual 25 years of age 
or older riding in the front seat. If one (1) of those individuals is in the vehicle, there 

21 
are no restrictions on the number of passengers. However, the driver is not allowed 
to transport more passengers than there are safety belts. 
9. During the second three (3) months of operation under a Junior Driver’s License, the 
individual may begin transporting immediate family members; siblings and parents 
only. 
10. After holding a Junior Driver’s License for six (6) months, there is no restriction on 
the number of passengers they can transport in the vehicle. However, the driver is 
not allowed to transport more passengers than there are safety belts. 
11. An individual who holds a Vermont Junior Driver’s License must be eighteen (18) 
years of age and must not have any recalls, suspensions, or revocations during the 
previous six (6) month period, to be eligible to obtain a Driver’s License.  This six 
(6) month period commences on the date of their reinstatement. 
12. When an individual who has a Junior Driver’s License from another state applies for 
a Vermont Junior Driver’s License, he or she will be required to provide proof they 
have successfully completed a state approved driver education course which meets 
or exceeds Vermont requirements. They will also be required to pass an eye, written 
and road test. They will also be subject to the Graduated License Law unless they 
have held the other state's license for a period of at least six months. 
13. A Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License is considered to be a ‘provisional 
license’, which is recallable.  Any of the following actions will result in the recall of 
an individual’s Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License (for more detail, see 23 
VSA § 607a, § 614a): 
 
Carrying Passengers for Hire, Junior Operator Violation (CPH) = 90-day recall 
 
Driving For Employer/Employment, Junior Operator Violation (DFE) = 90-day 
recall 
 
Recommendation From a Diversion/Reparative Board Recall (DRB) = 30-day 
recall 
 
Junior Operator Points Accumulation Recall (JRP) = 90 day recall (for a single 
3 pt. Speeding violation or a 6 pt. Total) 
 
Junior Operator texting  (JRT) = 30 day recall (includes fines of at least $100 and 
at least two points on your driving record) 
 
While a recall is in effect, an individual is ineligible for a Junior Driver’s  
License or a Driver’s License. 
 
When a recall is issued, the individual has the right to a hearing.  
 
When a Learner’s Permit or Junior Driver’s License is recalled, it shall be        
restored upon the expiration of a specific term, and, if required, when the        
individual has passed a re-examination. 
 
No reinstatement fee shall be due when a Learner’s Permit/Junior Driver’s 
License recall is restored. 

22 
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death 
and injury for teenagers. As a parent or guardian, you 
have a critical role in influencing your child’s safe 
driving habits.  
The law requires teens 15 to 18 years old learn to drive 
in stages. Restrictions on young drivers are based on 
scientific findings and some of the major factors that 
place teens at risk: age, lack of driving experience, 
passengers and other distractions. The GDL exists to 
save teen lives and reduce injuries.  
However, the GDL alone cannot prevent all teen 
crashes. 
More US teens are killed texting while driving than 
drinking. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Must See Texting while Driving PSA from 
Tredegar Comprehensive School and 
Gwent Police (Gwent is in south-east 
Wales, UK) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
Chapter 6 – Fees, Renewals & Replacements 
 
Fees: 
 
Fees you must pay to get a Learner’s Permit 
 
Exam and Learner’s Permit fee = $63.00 (knowledge test $39.00 + permit $24.00) 
 
Fees you must pay to get a Junior Driver’s License if you have a valid Learner’s Permit 
 
Road Test Exam and Junior Driver’s License = $62.00 (road test $23.00 + license 
$39.00) 
 
Fees you must pay to get a Driver’s License if you have a valid Learner’s Permit 
 
Road test and 4-year license = $85.00 (road test $23.00 + license $62.00) 
 
Road test and 2-year license = $62.00 (road test $23.00 + license $39.00) 
 
Fees you must pay to get a Driver’s License if you have a valid Driver’s License from 
another State 
 
4-year license fee = $62.00 
 
2-year license fee = $39.00 
 
+ $4.00 per year if a motorcycle endorsement is being carried over. 
 
Renewal fees 
 
4-year license = $62.00 (with motorcycle endorsement = $78.00) 
 
2-year license = $39.00 (with motorcycle endorsement = $47.00) 
 
Learner’s Permit - $24.00 
 
Replacement of lost or corrected Learner’s Permit or License (name or address change) 
 
$24.00 
 
Enhanced Driver’s License (EDL) 
 
$36.00 (in addition to any other fees) – visit dmv.vermont.gov for additional details 
on Enhanced Driver’s Licenses 
 
Fees are accurate as of July 1, 2024. All fees are 
subject to change.  
 
Visit the DMV website at dmv.vermont.gov to verify fees. 
 
 
 
 

24 
Permit/License Renewals 
 
 
About a month before your license or permit expires, a renewal application will be 
mailed to your address as listed in our files. Answer all the questions on the form, 
sign it and return the renewal form and fees to the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
The department will then mail to you an updated license or permit. If you do not 
receive a renewal form in the mail, you can obtain a renewal application at a 
Department of Motor Vehicles office, or online at dmv.vermont.gov. Fill out the form 
and mail it with the correct fees to the Department of Motor Vehicles, 120 State 
Street, Montpelier, VT 05603-0001, or visit one of our offices. A license photo is 
valid for 8 years. Your photo will be updated any time you renew in person. 
 
 
A Vermont license that has expired for more than 14 days is not a valid license. You 
may not drive with it. 
 
 
If your Vermont driver's license is expired more than three (3) years, you must be 
tested again to obtain a new license. 
 
You can renew your license online at mydmv.vermont.gov. 
 
How do I replace my Lost License or Learner’s Permit? 
 
If you lose your license, you may obtain a replacement from the Department of Motor 
Vehicles. 
 
You can replace your license online at mydmv.vermont.gov. 
 
I Have Changed My Name or Address. What Do I Do? 
 
If you have changed your name or address, you must report the change to the 
Department of Motor Vehicles within 30 days.  
 
You can update your address online at mydmv.vermont.gov (name changes require 
an in person visit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
Chapter 7 - Driving Safely and Studying for your Permit 
 
The information in this section will help you learn to drive safely and will help prepare 
you for the Learner’s Permit test. 
 
REMEMBER:  Be sure to read the rest of the driver manual before taking your written 
test. Even if you pass your test, your permit will not be issued unless all other 
requirements have been met and all required documents have been provided. 
 
HOW TO DRIVE SAFELY 
 
Motor vehicle crashes are most often caused by actions or errors of the driver.   
However, any motorist can drive safely by using care, courtesy, and caution, and by 
modeling the proper behaviors. 
 
Where Should I Start Driving? 
A person with a Learner’s Permit should first practice driving in an empty parking lot 
or on roads that do not have much traffic.  It is important to develop basic car control 
before driving in areas that are busy.  As your skills improve, you may drive on roads 
where there is more traffic.  
Because you may be driving more slowly than most other drivers, you may be 
creating a hazard.  If traffic is backing up behind you, you are required by law to pull 
over to the side of the road, when it is safe to do so, and allow following vehicles to go 
by.  This makes driving safer for them, and for you—you will be more relaxed without 
the pressure of vehicles behind you.     
 
What should I practice first? 
Practice driving with your hands in the proper position.  If you look at the steering 
wheel as the face of a clock, a 9 and 3 or an 8 and 4 position is recommended. 
Work on left and right turns, smooth braking, and controlled starts and stops.  Use 
hand over hand steering for turning. 
 
Driver readiness  
Before you drive your vehicle you should do the following: 
1. Adjust the seat properly. 
2. Adjust all mirrors. 
3. Test the foot and parking/emergency brakes 
4. Adjust and fasten the safety belt. 
5. Lock the doors.                       
6. Turn on the headlights.        
 
Stopping Your Vehicle                    
Even when road and vehicle conditions are ideal, and the driver is perfectly alert, it 
takes a great distance to stop a motor vehicle. To stop your vehicle, four things must 
happen: 
1. You must see and recognize the danger and the need to stop. 

26 
2. Your brain must tell your foot to step on the brakes. 
3. Your foot must move to the brake pedal and operate the brake. 
4. Your brakes must work correctly. 
 
The distance your vehicle travels from the moment you see danger until you step on 
the brake is called reaction distance.  After seeing danger, it takes the average driver 
about 3/4 of a second to apply the brakes. The higher the driving speed, the further the 
vehicle will travel before the driver is able to apply the brakes. The distance your vehicle 
travels from the time the brakes are applied to the time that the 
vehicle is brought to a stop is called braking distance. Braking 
distance will vary depending on the conditions of the road.  It is 
important to realize that on wet, icy or gravel roads, the braking 
distance will be much longer.  When it first starts to rain, oil, rubber, 
dirt and water combined make roads especially slippery, which 
increases your braking distance.      
 
Signals      
The law states that a driver must use a turn signal not less than 100 feet before making 
a turn or changing lanes.  Signaling three to five seconds before any of these actions 
covers this requirement.  Applying your brakes will signal vehicles behind you that you 
are planning to slow down or stop. If your vehicle’s directional lights or brake lights are 
not working, you must use hand signals to let other drivers know you are planning to stop 
or turn.  Directional lights or brake lights which do not work must be fixed immediately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
Left Turns 
Many crashes take place when one motor vehicle is turning left. Most of these 
collisions would not happen if the driver made the turn properly. 
Upon approaching an intersection at which you wish to make a left turn, you must 
signal 3 to 5 seconds in advance to warn others of your intention to 
turn. Then as you gradually slow down, check the rear view mirror to 
see that the driver of the vehicle behind you has understood your 
signal.  Be sure no bicyclist or motor vehicle behind you is trying to 
pass on your left. On a multilane road, always make sure you’re in the 
left lane well in advance of the turn.  Never move suddenly from the 
right lane to the left lane. 
When you reach your turn, wait until there are no oncoming vehicles before making 
your turn. Position your vehicle within one foot of the centerline, if it is safe to do so. 
Keep your wheels straight until you are ready to turn - that way you will not be pushed 
into oncoming traffic if you are hit from behind.  Any oncoming motor vehicle or 
bicyclist has the right-of-way.  Always remember to look for pedestrians who may be 
crossing the street you are going to turn into.  If pedestrians are present you must yield 
the right-of-way to them. 
When the road is clear, make your turn at the proper speed and keep to the right of 
the center line.  After completing your turn, check the rearview mirror and center your 
vehicle in the lane. 
 
Well ahead of turn, look for any following vehicles and move within one foot of the 
center line giving signal if needed for moving over. 

27 
 
Signal 3 to 5 seconds before turn and begin slowing down. 
 
Search the intersection right, front, and left before starting to make turn. 
 
Enter street just to right of center line. 
 
After completing turn, check rearview mirror and center vehicle in your lane. 
 
Right Turns   
At the approach to a right turn the vehicle should be about three 
feet from the right side of the road. Do not swing your vehicle to the 
left before turning right. Signal 3 to 5 seconds in advance to warn 
others of your intention to turn.  Then as you gradually slow down, 
check the mirror to see that the driver of the vehicle behind you has 
understood your signal.  Search the intersection left, front, and right 
before starting to make your turn. 
Always remain alert for the presence of bicyclists or pedestrians on the right side of 
the road as you make your turn.  You must yield to any pedestrian or bicyclist. 
Make your turn close to the right side of your lane.  After completing your turn, check 
your rearview mirror and center your vehicle in the lane. 
 
 
Well ahead of the turn, look for any following vehicles and move over to the right 
side of your lane. 
 
Signal 3 to 5 seconds before turn and begin slowing down. 
 
Search the intersection left, front, right and quickly left again just before starting your 
turn. 
 
Keep close to right while turning. After completing turn, check mirror, and center 
vehicle in your lane. 
 
NOTE: If you are turning into a street with more than one lane going in your direction, 
turn into the nearest lane.  
Then follow the basic rule of driving on a multilane road:  Drive to the right unless 
you are passing or turning.  
 
A Visual Search Pattern  
A driver should be constantly looking for potential hazards, including pedestrians, 
bicyclists, and other vulnerable users.  A visual search pattern is an orderly way to search 
for hazards in all directions. A repeating search pattern can help the driver notice 
changing road conditions as well as changes in and around their intended path of travel. 
 
Four Seconds - A Safe Following Distance 
How do you know if you are driving too close to the vehicle in front of you? Using 
the 4-second method, you should have enough space between your vehicle and the 
vehicle in front of you in case you must stop quickly. However, if you are driving in poor 
road conditions, when visibility is poor or driving at higher speeds, you should allow 
more than four seconds of following distance. The distance between your vehicle and the 
vehicle in front of you should be determined by speed and existing conditions. 
  

28 
Follow These Steps for Four-Second Safety Spacing 
1. The vehicle ahead is about to pass a checkpoint such as a sign, driveway, pole, or 
parked vehicle. 
2. Start counting seconds as the rear of that vehicle passes the checkpoint. 
3. Stop counting when your vehicle reaches the checkpoint. If it takes less than four 
seconds for your vehicle to reach that point, you are following too closely and must 
increase your following distance. If it takes four or more seconds to pass the 
checkpoint, you have a safe following distance. 
 
NOTE:  An easy method to count seconds is to count "one thousand one, one thousand 
two." 
 
Speed Limits and Safe Speeds 
The maximum speed for any vehicle on all Vermont roads is 50 miles per hour or as 
posted.  The maximum speed for any vehicle on an Interstate in Vermont is 65 miles per 
hour or as posted.   The law states that a motor vehicle shall be driven at all times so that 
it is under control. A vehicle must be driven at a speed that is reasonable considering the 
dangers that may exist on the road. At intersections, on curves, in heavy traffic, through 
construction zones, during bad weather, and when pedestrians or bicyclists are present, 
you must drive at a speed that is safe for the driving conditions. Many crashes are caused 
by driving too fast for conditions. Sometimes even 10 miles per hour can be an unsafe 
speed. 
 
Right-of-way    
1. A driver on any road must yield the right-of-way 
to pedestrians, bicyclists and other traffic already 
in the intersection. 
2. When nearing an intersection marked with a "yield 
right-of-way" sign, you are required to travel at a 
speed slow enough to be able to stop if necessary.  
Enter only when the way is clear.  
3. At a four-way stop, the first vehicle to arrive 
should have the right-of-way. 
4. When two vehicles approach a four-way stop 
intersection at approximately the same time, 
coming from different directions, the driver on the 
left should yield the right-of-way to the driver on 
the right. 
5. If you are turning left, you must yield to all 
oncoming traffic. Any vehicle coming toward you, whether it is a motor vehicle or 
a bicyclist, has the right of way.  
6. A driver who is approaching the road from a driveway, alley, parking lot, or T-
intersection must yield the right-of-way to all traffic on the road.  
7. Before entering any intersection, you must always search in all directions. Be sure 
you have a clear path before entering the intersection. 
 

29 
Parking Your Vehicle 
There are many options for parking offered in the driving environment.  These include 
parallel parking, angle parking (left or right), and perpendicular parking (left or right – 
forward or backward). Don’t cross the center line to park.  For more information on 
parallel parking see the “road test” section of this study guide. 
A vehicle parked on a 2-lane road must have the right wheels within 12 inches of the 
right side of the road or curb.  On a one-way road the vehicle must be positioned within 
12 inches of the side of the road.  Your vehicle must be parked in the same direction as 
traffic flow. 
If you must park on a highway in a rural area, you must have all wheels off the 
traveled portion of the road.  Be careful not to stop on a hill, curve, or where your vehicle 
cannot be seen for at least 150 feet in either direction, or in any area posted for no parking.       
 
Parking on Hills 
When parking on a hill, you must be sure your vehicle will not roll out into traffic. 
Always turn the front wheels and set the 
parking brake to prevent the vehicle from 
rolling into traffic. (The procedures for uphill 
and downhill parking pictured here apply to 
parking on the right side of the street or 
roadway).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Where You May Not Park     
• On the traveled portion of the highway  
• Beside a vehicle stopped or parked at the side of a street  
• On a sidewalk  
• Within an intersection  
• On a crosswalk  
• Beside any road work, so that you block traffic  
• On a bridge or in a tunnel  
• On any railroad tracks, or within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing 
• In front of any driveway  
• Within 6 feet of a fire hydrant  
• Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection  
• Within 30 feet of a flashing red or yellow light, stop sign, or traffic light  
• Within 20 feet of the driveway of a fire station or across the street within 75 feet of 
the driveway, when there are signs  
• Any place where an official sign says - No Parking 
• On a marked bicycle lane. 
• In a marked disabled parking area 
                                                                                                     
Roundabouts 
A roundabout is an intersection control feature where traffic enters and exits only 
through right turns and proceeds in a counter clockwise direction.  Roundabouts reduce 
vehicular delay, crashes, fuel consumption, and air pollution. In most situations, 

30 
roundabouts can handle motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists more safely than stop 
signs or traffic signals. Vehicle speeds approaching, within, and exiting the roundabout 
should be slow. 
Drivers must yield the right of way to traffic in the roundabout. Enter the roundabout 
only when there is a safe gap in traffic. Like all intersections, you must also yield to 
pedestrians and bicyclists when entering or exiting a roundabout. Always use your signal 
to show your intention to exit the roundabout. 
Some roundabouts have more than one circulating lane for traffic.  These require the 
user to pay special attention to the lane assignment signs and pavement markings before 
entering the roundabout in order to select the proper lane.  Driving with extra caution is 
needed when negotiating a multi-lane roundabout. Drivers may not change lanes once in 
the roundabout. Drivers must use proper mirror 
and blind spot checks before exiting the inside 
lane. 
When entering a two-lane roundabout with no 
signs or arrows the right lane is permitted to make 
right turning or through movements while the left 
lane is permitted to make left turns or through 
movements. 
Emergency vehicles in a roundabout 
Always yield to emergency vehicles. If you are not 
already in the roundabout pull over and let the 
emergency vehicles pass. If you are already in the 
roundabout pull over when you have safely exited 
the roundabout. 
 
Police Stops 
• 
Police vehicles attempting to stop drivers will do so by turning on flashing 
lights, or flashing lights and a siren. 
• 
Drive as close as you safely can to the right side of the road. Do not stop in an 
intersection or pull into the center median of a divided highway. 
• 
Keep your safety belt fastened until the officer has seen you wearing it. 
• 
Limit your movements and those of any passengers. 
• 
Take a deep breath and don’t panic. Remain calm while the officer explains why 
you have been stopped. 
• 
Show your license, vehicle registration, and proof of insurance when requested 
by the officer. 
• 
Stay in your vehicle. Do not get out unless requested. This is for your safety and 
the safety of the officer. 
• 
If in a dimly lit area turn on the vehicle’s interior lights, after stopping, and 
before the officer approaches. 
• 
Roadside isn’t the place to argue traffic offenses. There will be time in court to 
address the offense. 
 
 

31 
Move Over Law 
If you see or hear a vehicle with flashing blue 
or red signal lights and/or sounding a siren, 
approaching from any direction, the law says 
you must pull over to the right side of the road 
and stop. You must remain stopped until the 
emergency or law enforcement vehicle has gone 
by. 
If you see a police vehicle with flashing blue lights, or an emergency vehicle with 
flashing red lights, which is stopped, you must always proceed with caution (slow down).  
If you are on a four-lane highway, such as an Interstate, the law also requires you to make 
a lane change if you can do so safely.  
The law also requires drivers yield the right of way to any state, city or town 
maintenance vehicle working on a highway. For example, a driver approaching a 
snowplow with lights flashing must proceed with caution and yield the right of way. 
NOTE: Towing and repair vehicles usually have amber-colored flashing lights. You 
must use the same caution and procedures described above when you approach these 
stopped vehicles. 
 
TRAFFIC LIGHTS, ROAD SIGNS, AND HIGHWAY MARKINGS 
 
Traffic Lights 
Traffic signals control the right of way and provide for a smooth, orderly flow of 
traffic. If a signal light is dark, as in a power failure, stop as if there are stop signs in all 
directions. When a traffic signal is out of order and flashes yellow or red, you must obey 
that signal. 
 
 
Red Light: Stop before reaching either the stop line or the crosswalk, whichever comes 
first, and wait until the light is green (Green arrow signals may come on while the red 
light is displayed, you may proceed in the direction of the green arrow).   
Right turns at circular red lights are usually allowed, but only after the driver 
has stopped completely, scanned the intersection and yielded the right of way to 
pedestrians and other vehicles. Some intersections have signs or symbols that 
indicate you cannot turn right on red. 
A police officer may direct you through a red light.  You should follow the 
officer’s directions, with caution. 
 
Yellow Light: This light warns drivers that the light is about to turn red.  If 
you are too close to the intersection to stop safely, proceed with caution 
through the intersection. 
   
Green Light:  You may proceed on a green light if it is safe to do so.  But, if 
you are turning left you must yield the right of way to oncoming vehicles.  At 
some intersections where special emphasis is needed, a “left turn yield on green 
light” sign will be attached to the overhead wire near the signal.  
 

32 
Flashing Red: The flashing circular red light is like a stop sign. Stop, and proceed after 
yielding the right of way to all pedestrians, bicyclists, and vehicles.        
 
Flashing Yellow: Slow down, scan the intersection, yield to any oncoming vehicles 
before attempting to make a left turn and proceed with caution. 
 
Arrows 
Solid Red Arrow: Drivers intending to turn left must stop and wait. Do not enter an 
intersection to turn when a solid red arrow is being displayed.  
 
Solid Yellow Arrow: The left-turn signal is about to change to red and 
drivers should prepare to stop or prepare to complete a left turn if they are 
legally within the intersection and there is no conflicting traffic present. 
 
Flashing Yellow Arrow: Drivers are allowed to turn left after yielding to 
all oncoming traffic and to any pedestrians in the crosswalk. Oncoming 
traffic has a green light. Drivers must wait for a safe gap in oncoming 
traffic before turning. 
 
Solid Green Arrow: Left turns have the right of way. Oncoming traffic 
has a red light. 
  
Road Signs 
You can tell what road signs mean by the shape and color as well as the wording.  If 
the sign is covered by dirt, snow, or anything else, you should know the general meaning 
(regulatory, warning, information) of the sign by its shape.  
   
A stop sign has 8 sides.  It means you must stop scan the 
intersection, honor the right of way, and then proceed.
 
 
REMEMBER: You are required to stop before the stop line, 
crosswalk (marked or unmarked) or the intersecting road, 
whichever comes first. 
Yield right-of-way signs are the shape of an upside down 
triangle, and they mean you should slow down, search and 
enter only if the way is clear of pedestrians, bicyclists and 
vehicles.   
Circular signs with a large X and the letters RR indicate there 
is a railroad crossing ahead. 
 
 

33 
                                    Crossbuck signs are at all railroad crossings. They indicate 
where the tracks are. Slow down, look both ways, and listen 
for trains before crossing.  The smaller signs below the 
crossbuck indicate how many tracks there are at the crossing. 
When there are 2 or more tracks, one train passing might hide 
a train coming the other way.  There may also be gates and/or 
flashing lights. 
A sign in the shape of a triangle with the points cut off is 
displayed on vehicles which travel at slow speeds. For 
example, you will often see these signs on farm vehicles. 
 
Warning Signs 
Warning signs are placed where there is danger at all times, and a driver needs to slow 
down. They are usually diamond-shaped and yellow or green.  They may warn of sharp 
curves, unsafe intersections, or dips in the road.  Drivers should slow down.  Some 
warning signs give additional information, such as the safe speeds, or a distance, such as 
“Deer Crossing, next 3 miles”.  A downward arrow under a school or pedestrian sign 
indicates a crosswalk or crossing area.   
 
 
School 
 
Divided Highway 
 
Divided Highway 
Ends 
 
Lane Ends 
 
Slippery When Wet 
 
Hill 
 
Pedestrian Crosswalk 
 
Deer Crossing 
 
Intersection 
 
Hidden Road Right 

34 
Regulatory Signs                                                                               
Rectangular signs with white backgrounds indicate what 
things a driver must or must not do. These signs display speed 
limits, turning and passing laws, and other directions.  
 
Highway Markings 
Highway markings provide important information to 
drivers. They help a driver correctly position their vehicle, help 
direct them through various situations, let them know when 
passing is allowed and warn drivers of upcoming conditions. Major highways are marked 
with yellow center lines which serve two purposes: 
Center lines divide a highway into travel 
lanes. Multi-lane highways without a 
median have double solid lines to indicate 
the two opposing lanes of travel. When two 
or more lanes of travel are permitted in the 
same direction, a broken white line is used 
to divide each side of the highway into 
separate lanes for vehicles traveling in the 
same direction. 
The lines show if you may or may not pass.  If there is a solid line or two solid lines, 
it is recommended that you do not pass.  If there is a solid line but a broken line in your 
lane, you may pass if it is clear ahead.  If there is a solid line in your lane but a broken 
line in the other lane, you should not pass, but the motor 
vehicle in the other lane may pass. 
Continuous two-way left turn lanes are not designed to 
be used as travel lanes since traffic moving in both 
directions may want to use the lane to make a left-hand turn. 
A short distance prior to your left turn, you should signal 
and carefully move into the turning lane. So that you don't 
block traffic, all of your vehicle should be in the turn lane. 
When the way is clear, proceed with your turn. 
Sometimes highway markings provide additional information to the driver. For 
example, at a yield intersection, there may be a yield sign beside the highway and there 
may also be a yield line painted on the highway.  This series of white triangles, pointing 
toward approaching cars, shows drivers where they should stop, if they are required to 
yield to pedestrians or other vehicles.  
Lane use control signs, or pavement markings, may be used to direct drivers into the 
correct lane when turning. When driving from one road onto a 
multiple lane road where there is a choice of lanes, right turning 
drivers must turn into the right lane. Left turning drivers must 
first turn into the left lane. When there are two lanes turning in 
the same direction each turning lane must stay in their own 
turning path throughout the turn. Multiple lanes may turn in the 
same direction at the same time when lane use control signs or pavement markings permit 
it. Remain in the designated lane until after the turn has been completed. Lane changes 

35 
may take place after the turn has been 
completed. Avoid changing lanes while turning. 
This is an illegal maneuver and leads to crashes. 
Drivers must always follow through on the 
directions that are indicated in the lane they are 
in. For example, if a driver is driving in a lane with a straight arrow, it is illegal and 
unsafe to attempt a turn to the right or left once they are at the intersection. A sudden lane 
change increases the risk of a crash. It is safer to drive around the block and find an 
alternate route to the destination. 
 
WORK ZONE SAFETY 
 
A work zone is an area along a highway where there is construction, maintenance, or 
utility work.  A work zone may be stationary, or it may be a mobile operation that moves 
down the road slowly, as in the case of line striping, mowing, and snow removal.   
For your safety, and for the workers’ safety, it is important that drivers slow down 
and pay extra attention when approaching and driving through a work zone.   
Many crashes occur before the actual work area, where drivers are slowing down 
and/or merging. Be courteous, and merge into the appropriate lane as soon as it is safe to 
do so.  
Most crashes in work zones are rear end crashes that are caused by driving too fast 
for conditions and failing to maintain a safe following distance.  Remember that stopped 
traffic may be hidden around a curve or over a hill. 
Tips for Safe Driving in Vermont Work Zones 
• 
Rules apply 24/7 - not just during daylight hours. 
• 
Slow down to the posted speed limit and adjust for weather conditions. 
Speeds are reduced to protect motorists and workers. 
• 
Minimize distraction - give your full attention to the road and driving 
• 
Expect the unexpected - all modes of travel can be encountered in a work 
zone, including pedestrians and bicyclists. 
• 
Follow signs -they will guide you through the work zone safely. 
• 
Be courteous-Don't change lanes in the work zone, tailgate, or engage in 
other aggressive behaviors. 
• 
Merge as instructed,as soon as it is safe to do so in the work zone, or as 
traffic  conditions warrant. 
• 
Don't overcrowd the roadway workers or their equipment - give them as 
much space as possible. 
• 
Maintain a 4 second following distance. It takes 240 feet for a passenger car 
to come to a complete stop on dry pavement traveling at 60 MPH, versus 75 
feet for the same car to come to a stop at 30 MPH. 
• 
Be patient, expect delays, or seek an alternate route. Remember that roadway 
workers are improving our highways for your safety. 
 
FINES ARE DOUBLED FOR SPEEDING IN A WORK ZONE 

36 
Work Zone Signs   
Work zone signs are orange and diamond or 
rectangular shaped.  They provide important 
information to help the driver safely drive through 
the work zone. They warn the driver of hazards 
ahead, such as closed lanes, detours, rough 
pavement, or flaggers.   
 
Flaggers  
Traffic is often required to stop in a work zone, to allow construction equipment to 
move, or because there is only one lane open for traffic moving in both directions.  
Flaggers use stop/slow paddles, or sometimes orange flags, to guide traffic safely through 
the work zone.  A flagger has the legal authority to control traffic and must be obeyed. 
 
 
Channeling Devices  
Cones, drums, and barricades are often used in work zones to keep traffic out of 
hazardous roadwork areas and to guide traffic safely through the work zone.                     
 
 
Flashing arrow panels 
Flashing arrow panels may also be used to guide drivers into the correct lane.  When 
the arrows are not in use, the panels are put in “caution” mode, with a straight line of 
blinking lights, or blinking lights on the 4 corners of the sign.  Drivers should slow down 
when they see the panels in “caution” 
mode. 
  
Work zones may have temporary 
pavement markings.  White markers or 
lines separate lanes going in the same 
direction.  Yellow markers or lines separate lanes going in opposite directions.  The 
yellow markings will be on your left-- if they are not, you are in the wrong lane. 
 

37 
Low Shoulders 
Sometimes, especially in construction zones, the road level may be higher than the 
shoulder. If your wheels drop off the pavement onto a low shoulder, reduce speed without 
braking, and turn back onto the pavement very carefully at a slow speed. 
 
RULES OF THE ROAD AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS 
 
It is against the law to drive your vehicle through, around, or under a closed railroad 
gate.  It is also against the law to pass another vehicle at a railroad crossing. 
The driver of every vehicle shall drive at a safe, reduced speed when approaching and 
crossing any public or private railroad grade crossing. 
By law, drivers must STOP not less than 
15 feet from the nearest rail when: 
1. Flashing lights, lowered gates, or a 
flagman signals the approach or 
passage of a railroad train.  
2. You see a train or hear its whistle.  
3. When there is a STOP sign at the 
crossing.  
 
After bringing the vehicle to a full STOP 
when required in the above cases, the motor 
vehicle may be driven across the tracks 
when it is safe to do so. NOTE: Pedestrians, bicyclists, and moped riders also must 
observe railroad warning signals and may not cross railroad tracks until it is safe to do 
so. 
If a dangerous condition exists at a rail crossing, call the number listed on the 
emergency sign. This will allow the rail company to stop or reroute approaching rail 
traffic until the hazard is removed. Be sure to give the posted crossing number so that the 
hazard can be identified correctly.  
 
SHARING THE ROAD 
 
Sharing the Road with Pedestrians 
Drivers must watch carefully for pedestrians. Be especially alert for young, elderly, 
disabled or intoxicated pedestrians.  They are the most frequent victims in motor vehicle/ 
pedestrian collisions.   

38 
 Many crashes are the result of pedestrians not paying attention to or entering traffic 
carelessly, while other crashes are caused by drivers who fail to yield the right-of-way or 
do not use caution when pedestrians are present.    
Driver Responsibilities 
 Drive slowly and remain alert in areas where pedestrians are present. 
 When a vehicle ahead of you stops for a pedestrian, do not pass the 
stopped vehicle even if there are two lanes provided.  This is a frequent 
cause of death for pedestrians. 
 Watch for pedestrians who are walking against a red light, stepping into 
traffic from between parked vehicles and crossing in locations where 
there is not a marked crosswalk. Even when pedestrians cross the street 
carelessly, the driver must yield. 
 Do not block a crosswalk when stopped or waiting to make a turn. 
Blocking a crosswalk with all or part of your vehicle forces pedestrians to 
go around you and puts them in a potentially dangerous situation. 
 Watch for pedestrians whenever you cross a sidewalk or road shoulder, such as 
entering or leaving an alley, driveway or private road. 
 Use caution when children are playing in or near the street. Children often move 
quickly and do not check for traffic. 
 Use caution in the presence of elderly pedestrians. They may not be alert to the 
dangers of traffic situations. 
 Do not stop to pick up hitchhikers on the Interstate or the ramps. 
 Use extra caution when approaching a blind pedestrian. When a pedestrian who has 
a white cane or is being led by a guide dog is crossing or waiting to cross the street 
ahead of you, you must stop and yield the right-of-way. 
 When you are turning, look for and yield to pedestrians crossing side streets.   
 
Many intersections with signals have “No Turn On Red” signs that light up during 
pedestrian crossing times.  Do not turn right on red when the signs are lit. Remember:  
DO NOT turn right on a red arrow. 
At marked crosswalks, a pedestrian sign may be placed on the road to remind drivers 
that they are required to yield to pedestrians within crosswalks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School Zones 
Be particularly alert at all times for children and pedestrians in a school zone.  Also 
watch for school buses which may be arriving and departing.   Signs or flashing lights 
warn you that you are approaching a school or school crossing.  Many school zones have 
lower speed limits, and the speed limit signs will have the words “when flashing” or 
“when children are present” to let you know when the speed limit is in effect.  Note that 
regular school hours are not the only time children are present at schools.  After school 
and weekend activities often take place at schools. 
 
Children at Play 
As a driver, be extra careful in residential areas and at times and places where children 
are likely to be present.  Teach your own children the rights and duties of pedestrians at 

39 
an early age.  Always be extra watchful when backing in or out of a driveway.  Children 
may run behind or be playing behind your vehicle. 
 
 
 
 
 
Pedestrian Responsibilities                
Although drivers must yield to pedestrians, pedestrians must not suddenly leave a 
curb or other safe waiting place and walk into the path of a vehicle if it is so close that it 
is an immediate hazard.  Vehicles cannot stop at once. Pedestrians should be aware of the 
following safety rules and suggestions: 
Look in both directions before crossing any street.  Always obey "Walk" or "Don't 
Walk" signs.  Do not start to cross while the pedestrian signal is flashing “Don’t Walk”.  
If you have already started to cross during the “walk” signal, you will have time to safely 
complete your crossing during the flashing “Don’t Walk”. 
When facing a yellow or red light, do not cross unless a "Walk" sign is showing.  If 
there are no pedestrian signals, cross when the light turns green for the traffic going in 
the same direction.  Watch for turning vehicles. 
When there are sidewalks, pedestrians should not walk on or along the highway. If 
there are no sidewalks, you should walk as far as possible to the left side of the road 
facing traffic.    
Use crosswalks. The main purpose of crosswalks is to encourage pedestrians to cross 
only at certain locations where crossings can be made safely. 
When walking at dusk or at night, wear light colored or reflective clothing and carry 
a light. 
Don’t wear headphones, especially in busy areas.  Being able to hear approaching 
traffic adds to your safety.                 
 
Along streets or highways without sidewalks never walk on the right side with back to 
traffic. Walk on the left side facing approaching traffic. Wear light-colored clothing if 
walking at dawn, at dusk, or after dark. Carry a flashlight and wear reflectorized 
clothing. 
 
Sharing the Road with School Buses 
 
School Bus Stops  
It is against the law to pass a school bus which has stopped and has its red 
warning lights on.  Never pass from any direction when the red lights are on. 
When a school bus is on the highway and is about to pick up or discharge students, 
the school bus driver activates the alternately flashing yellow lights and begins slowing 
down.   You should be preparing to stop.  After the bus has stopped,  the driver will 

40 
activate the alternately flashing red warning lights. Once the red warning lights have been 
activated you must stop your vehicle.  
Remember, even in a school yard, you must not pass a stopped school bus with its 
alternately flashing red warning lights activated.  
There are a few exceptions where a stop is not necessary.  You do not have to stop on 
a divided highway if the school bus is traveling in the opposite direction.  A concrete 
barrier may be used to separate traffic from the bus, and you are not required to stop. 
In Vermont, if you are found guilty of passing a stopped school bus with its warning 
lights on, you will be subject to a substantial  fine and five points on your driver’s license. 
 
Sharing the Road with Bicyclists 
The number of people riding bicycles on streets and highways is growing daily, both 
for exercise and transportation use. Under state law bicyclists have the right to operate 
on all roads, unless they are specially prohibited, such as on limited-access highways like 
the Interstate.  
The same traffic rules and regulations for vehicle drivers apply to bicyclists.  
Bicycles, however, are quieter and less visible than other vehicles, especially at night.  
As a motorist you should drive defensively around a bicyclist because the slightest 
mistake could cause serious injury or death.  When you approach a bicyclist, keep on the 
lookout and slow down.  Give them plenty of room when passing and be prepared to stop 
suddenly.  Do not honk at a bicyclist unless you have good cause to warn them.  The loud 
noise could startle the rider and cause them to lose control.  It is important to remember 
that bicyclists have the same rights and duties as motor vehicle operators.  To avoid 
conflict, drivers of motor vehicles need to know the rules: 
 
Driver Responsibilities 
 Share the road with bicyclists; they have a legal right to ride on the road.  Drivers 
must be courteous and cautious even if it takes a little longer. 
 Be aware that bicyclists are allowed to ride as far to the left as needed, when necessary 
to be safe. 
 In some instances it is safest for a bicyclist to “take the lane” by riding toward the 
center of the lane.  There may be reasons for the bicyclist to be riding in the travel 
lane, such as roadway hazards not visible to motorists, or to position themselves 
correctly in the proper travel lane. 
 Learn to recognize situations and obstacles which may be hazardous to cyclists, such 
as potholes, drain grates, railroad tracks and narrow bridges or roadways.  Give them 
adequate space to maneuver. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Be aware that when a bicyclist is making a left turn, the cyclist should signal and 
move to the left side of the lane or into the turning lane. This is the proper maneuver 
and the cyclist should be allowed to safely complete the turn before being overtaken 
by motor vehicle traffic. 
 Leave at least four feet of passing space between the right side of your vehicle and a 
bicyclist.  If the road is too narrow for motor vehicles and bicycles to ride safely side 
by side, wait until it is safe to pass the bicyclist without forcing them off the side of 
the road. 

41 
 Be aware that two bicyclists may legally ride side by side. Slow down until it is safe 
to pass, or give them time to adjust their position.  Even then, do not pass the bicyclists 
until it is safe. 
 When turning left at an intersection, yield to oncoming bicyclists just as you would 
yield to oncoming motorists.  Bicyclists may be traveling faster than you realize, so 
give them adequate space. 
 
Common Vehicle-caused Collisions with Bicycles 
Four common errors could cause you to strike a bicyclist: 
1. Turning left without noticing/yielding to an oncoming bicyclist. 
2. Turning right at an intersection or driveway without checking for a bicyclist on 
the right who is continuing straight ahead or coming off a sidewalk. 
3. Entering or crossing a street without checking for a bicyclist in the street or on 
the sidewalk. 
4. Opening a vehicle door into the path of a bicyclist. 
 
Bicyclists Responsibilities         
Bicyclists are valid road users and have all the rights and responsibilities of other 
vehicle drivers.  Although a license isn’t required to ride a bicycle, bicyclists must obey 
all the rules of the road. Bicyclists are allowed to ride two abreast so long as they do not 
impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic. Obey the following rules for a safe and 
legal cycling experience: 
 Obey all traffic signals and signs.  If you break any traffic laws, you are subject to a 
ticket and fines. 
 Ride with traffic.  Always ride with through traffic on the right side of the road. If 
you approach a right turn lane and intend to go straight, do not enter the right turn 
lane. 
 Ride in a predictable manner.  Always ride in a straight line; do not weave in and out 
of parked cars. If the road is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel side by 
side, the bicyclist should occupy the lane until it is safe to move back to the right.  
Check over your shoulder before changing your lane position and do not weave 
between parked vehicles. 
 Signaling turns.  You must always signal your intent to turn, using the proper hand 
signals.  Look to make sure lanes are clear of traffic before you make a lane change 
or turn. 
Bicycle Hand Signal 
 

42 
Sharing the Road with Skateboards, Scooters, etc. 
Of recent special concern are personal wheeled transportation users such as 
skateboarders, roller-bladers,  nonmotorized scooters, electric wheelchairs, etc.  People 
using the roadway with these types of devices can sometimes be traveling at a significant 
rate of speed. Users can move abruptly and change direction unexpectedly into your 
travel path. Be especially alert and cautious around these types of roadway users. 
 
Sharing the Road with Motorcycles 
Today’s motorcycle riders are friends, relatives and neighbors.  The motorcyclist has 
the same rights and responsibilities on the highway as drivers of other vehicles.  Motorists 
should recognize this and not attempt to crowd motorcycles or take the right-of-way from 
cyclists.  Motorcyclists on the other hand must operate as responsible road users and not 
attempt to take advantage of the cycle’s narrow silhouette and  maneuverability. 
Motorcyclists often slow by downshifting or merely rolling off the throttle, thus not 
activating the brake light. Allow more than 4 seconds of following distance. At 
intersections, predict a motorcyclist may slow down without visual warning. 
Turn signals on a motorcycle usually are not self-canceling, thus some riders, 
(especially beginners) sometimes forget to turn them off after a turn or lane change. Make 
sure a motorcycle’s signal is for real. 
Motorcyclists often adjust position within a lane to be seen more easily and to 
minimize the effects of wind, road debris, and passing vehicles. Understand that 
motorcyclists adjust lane position for a purpose, not to be reckless or show off. 
Because of its small size a motorcycle seems to be moving faster than it really is. 
Don’t think motorcyclists are speed demons. 
Because of its small size, a motorcycle may look farther away than it is. When 
checking traffic to turn at an intersection, predict a motorcycle is closer than it looks.  
Because of its small size, a motorcycle can be easily hidden by objects inside or 
outside a car (door posts, mirrors, passengers, bushes, trees, parked cars, fences, bridges, 
blind spots, etc). Take an extra moment to thoroughly check traffic, whether you’re 
changing lanes or turning at intersections. 
Stopping distance for motorcycles is nearly the same as for cars, but slippery 
pavement makes stopping quickly difficult. Allow more following distance behind a 
motorcycle because it can’t always stop “on a dime”. 
Maneuverability is one of a motorcycle’s better characteristics, especially at slower 
speeds and with good road conditions. But don’t expect a motorcyclist to always be able 
to dodge out of the way. 
Carrying a passenger complicates a motorcyclist’s task. Balance is more difficult. 
Stopping distance is increased. Maneuverability is reduced. Predict more problems when 
you see two on a motorcycle, especially near intersections. 
Mirrors are smaller on a motorcycle and usually convex. This gives the motorcyclist 
a smaller image of you and makes you appear farther back than you actually are. Keep at 
least a four second space cushion when following a motorcyclist. 
There are a lot more cars and trucks than motorcycles on the road, and some drivers 
don’t “recognize” a motorcycle and ignore it (usually unintentionally). Look for 
motorcycles, especially when checking traffic at an intersection. 
At night, single headlights and taillights on motorcycles can blend into the lights of 
other traffic. Those “odd” lights could be a motorcycle. 

43 
Motorcycles are entitled to a full lane. When passing a motorcycle, change lanes 
completely.  Never cut in too closely just after you have overtaken a motorcycle. Be sure 
to use your turn signals to alert a rider of your intention to pass, change lanes or turn. 
Allow a passing motorcyclist plenty of room and never try to speed up to stay ahead of a 
motorcycle passing you. 
When a motorcycle is in motion, don’t think of it as motorcycle; think of it as a 
person. 
Note: More information about motorcycle laws and rules, and how to obtain a 
motorcycle permit or endorsement, can be found in the Vermont Motorcycle Manual. 
 
Sharing the Road with Large Trucks 
Each year there are more than 250,000 crashes involving passenger vehicles and large 
trucks. In more than 70% of fatal crashes involving automobiles and trucks, it was the 
driver of the other vehicle, not the truck driver, who caused the 
crash.  Most crashes involving automobiles and trucks occur in 
daylight on straight and dry pavement under good weather 
conditions. Trucks are much bigger and heavier than other vehicles.  
In four out of five fatal crashes involving trucks, the driver of the 
other vehicle was killed.  Many of these crashes could be avoided 
if motorists knew about truck limitations and how to steer clear of 
unsafe situations involving trucks. 
 
Remember, trucks don't drive like other vehicles. Generally 
speaking, the bigger the truck is: 
 The bigger the driver’s blind spots. 
 The more room the truck needs to maneuver. 
 The longer it takes the truck to stop. 
 The longer it takes you to pass it. 
 
WATCH BLIND SPOTS—THE “NO-ZONES” 
Large trucks have blind spots, or No-Zones, around the front, back and sides of the 
truck.  A truck could even turn into you, because these No-Zones make it difficult for the 
driver to see.  Don’t hang out in the No-Zones.   Remember, if you can’t see the trucks 
rear (side) view mirrors then the truck driver can’t see you. 
 
Passing                         
It takes longer to pass a large truck. You should maintain a consistent speed when 
passing.  Be sure you can see the cab of the truck in your inside rearview mirror before 
returning to the right lane.  When vehicles pull in front of a truck too soon, the truck 
driver may have to act quickly to avoid a crash. 
 
Backing Up 
When a truck driver is backing up, he sometimes must temporarily block the street to 
maneuver his trailer.  Never go around a truck that is preparing to back up or is in the 
process of backing up. Most trailers can completely hide objects that suddenly come 

44 
between them and a loading area. If you try to go around the truck, you can enter a blind 
spot and the truck driver can’t see you. 
 
Rear Blind spots 
Unlike other motor vehicles, trucks have long blind spots directly behind them. The 
truck driver can't see your vehicle in this position, and your own view of traffic flow is 
severely reduced. Following too closely greatly increases your chance of a rear-end 
collision with a truck. If you can’t see the trucks side rearview mirrors, then the truck 
driver can’t see you. 
 
Side Blind spots  
Trucks have much larger blind spots on both sides of their vehicles than passenger 
vehicles. When you drive in these blind spots for any length of time, you can't be seen by 
the truck driver. If a truck driver needs to change lanes quickly for any reason, a serious 
crash could occur if your vehicle is in the truck driver’s blind spot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wide Turn 
Always look for the truck’s turn signals.  Truck drivers often need to swing wide to 
the left in order to make a right turn. They cannot see vehicles directly behind or beside 
them. Do not cut in between the truck and the curb or shoulder to the right; this increases 
the possibility of a crash. 
 
Sharing the Road with Slow Moving Vehicles 
A slow moving vehicle, such as a tractor or other piece of large farm machinery is 
unable to travel at highway speed. It is identified by an orange and red triangular sign 
mounted on the rear of the vehicle. These signs help motorists recognize 
the vehicle ahead more quickly. The sooner you can identify a slow moving 
vehicle the more time you have to respond by reducing your speed. Slow 
moving vehicles may make wide turns at unmarked entrances to the right 
or left of the roadway. Some farm equipment is wider than the road itself. 
Some wagons, or equipment, may sway on the roadway and you might not be able to see 
the driver.  
 
When driving a slow moving vehicle causes traffic delays, it may 
pull over to the side of the road, if and when it is possible and safe to 
do so, in order to let others go by safely. Agricultural vehicle 
operators have a right to drive their vehicles on the road. Keep a safe 
following distance behind slow moving vehicles so the operator can 
see you, or you can see them, if possible. It may be necessary to allow for more than a 
four second following distance. Yield to wide equipment on narrow roads. Pass slow 
moving vehicles cautiously, and only if conditions are safe, and there is no on-coming 
traffic. Be patient and be alert to possible turning vehicles. Share the road safely with 
large and slow moving vehicles. Watch “Keeping our Rural Roads Safe in Vermont.” 

45 
Aggressive Drivers 
Aggressive drivers may not be thinking about the consequences of their actions when 
they drive too fast and pass when it is unsafe.  They may fail to use signals for lane 
changes and may weave in and out of traffic, follow too closely and cut off cars as they 
try to get ahead.   All these actions are unlawful and can result in traffic tickets or worse.  
Aggressive drivers may also yell, honk their horns and flash their lights at other drivers. 
If an aggressive driver cuts you off or does something else that is unsafe, do not try 
to get even. Stay calm.  Get out of the drivers way.  Don’t challenge them.  Trying to get 
even with the aggressive driver is a bad idea.   
 
Sharing the Road with Domestic Animals 
When on a public highway a person riding an animal, or driving an animal drawn 
vehicle, is granted all the rights of a driver of a motor vehicle. It shall be necessary for a 
motor vehicle operator to reduce speed when coming upon such a situation, 
and possibly even stop, in order to exercise every reasonable precaution 
to prevent the frightening of the animal/animals and to insure the safety 
and protection of the rider/driver. A motor vehicle operator should 
never blow their horn or rev their engine, especially when operating a 
motorcycle, so as not to startle the animal/animals when meeting , 
following, or passing such animals. Use the full traffic lane to completely pass the animal 
and never cut quickly back into your lane. When following a horse with a rider, horse 
and wagon, or herded animals, leave at least a 4 second following distance. A motor 
vehicle operator may be fined or imprisoned for negligent operation of a motor vehicle 
around such animals.  
 
Moose and Deer Safety 
A collision with a moose or deer can be fatal not only to the animal, but to the driver 
and passengers of a vehicle.   Driving cautiously in those areas on the highway marked 
with deer and moose crossing signs can save lives and prevent 
injuries. The presence of moose and deer on highways is most likely 
to occur during late evening, night time and early morning hours. 
Use caution when driving during those hours when deer and moose 
tend to roam or feed. 
The light from vehicle headlights may cause a deer to 
temporarily freeze and be unable to get out of the way of a vehicle, 
or it may bound at speeds up to 40 miles per hour towards their habitat. This means that 
if a deer is on the opposite side of the road from its habitat, it may turn and bolt in front 
of a vehicle.   Animals travel in pairs, so be prepared to see a second one once you see 
the first.   
Collisions with moose are more deadly to motorists.  Moose weigh much more than 
deer—more than a thousand pounds. Also, they are much taller than deer, and in a 
collision can land on top of the vehicle and its occupants with crushing force.  Deer eyes 
reflect headlights.  Because moose are taller, their eyes may not reflect in the  vehicle’s 
headlights. Also, moose are more darkly colored than deer.  These characteristics make 
moose especially difficult to see in the evening hours.    
 

46 
HAZARDOUS DRIVING CONDITIONS 
 
Floods and Storms  
Nationally, flash floods are responsible for more deaths than any other weather event. 
Nearly half of these fatalities are vehicle related. Storms, blizzards and other severe 
weather systems create hazardous driving conditions such as, high winds, limited 
visibility, slippery roads, and other unexpected hazards. When hazardous driving 
conditions are predicted, it’s best to stay home and avoid unnecessary travel. However, 
if you are caught out in a storm or come upon a hazardous situation, 
you should do the following: 
 Reduce your speed. Do not use cruise control.  Stay alert. 
 Keep more than four seconds of space between you and the 
motor vehicle in front of you. 
 Be especially alert at night or when driving on unfamiliar roads. 
 Be aware that bridges, culverts, and roadbeds may be washed 
away or undermined by flood waters. Do not drive around traffic barricades or past 
“road closed” signs.  Obey all detour signs.  
 Do not drive where water is over the road.  The depth of water is not always obvious 
and the water may hide danger such as washouts. Vehicle motors will stall in water, 
and you could become stranded or trapped. 
 If your vehicle stalls in a flooded area, abandon it as soon as possible. Flood waters   
can rise rapidly and sweep away a car and its occupants.  Many deaths have resulted 
from attempts to move stalled vehicles. If you choose to abandon your vehicle in a 
flooded area, respect the forces of running water.  As little as 4 inches of water can 
make it difficult to walk and can obstruct hazards from view. 
 Wind can be a problem for all motorists. It is especially hazardous for large vehicles 
and for drivers towing trailers.  Driving at slower speeds is the best practice. 
 Be aware that strong winds and heavy snow or ice may cause trees and wires to fall 
into the roadway. Never get near or cross downed wires. 
 Check for weather and flash flood warnings issued by the Weather Service, as well 
as all notices regarding hazardous driving conditions. 
 When visibility is poor, such as in fog, heavy rain, or heavy snow, use your low beam 
headlights. If you cannot clearly see persons or vehicles 500 feet ahead, the law 
requires drivers to have headlights turned on.   
 
Winter Driving  
Winter is the most difficult driving season, so use extra caution.  Not only do you 
have snow and ice to deal with, but there are fewer hours of daylight as well. 
• Make sure your brakes, windshield wipers, defroster, heater and exhaust system are 
in top condition. 
• Check your antifreeze, and be ready for colder temperatures.  Be sure the windshield 
washer reservoir is filled with a fluid made for winter use. 
• Make sure you’ve got good snow tires on all four wheels, and put them on early. Try 
not to get caught without them in the first snowfall.  Never combine different types 

47 
of tires on the same vehicle.  Many states allow tires with metal studs to be used only 
in winter conditions.  Always be sure the tires are properly inflated. 
• During ice or snow storms, especially when a traveler’s advisory is issued, don’t drive 
unless absolutely necessary.  If you must drive, completely clear the ice and snow 
from your entire vehicle and be sure your wipers are clear of any ice buildup.   The 
inside of your windows should also be free of moisture. 
• When sleet, freezing rain or snow start to fall, black ice can quickly form and you 
may not be able to see it.  Bridges, ramps, and overpasses are likely to freeze first.  
Slippery spots may still remain after road crews have cleared the highways. 
• Since you will need to drive more slowly, allow more time to reach your destination. 
Increase your following distance to more than 4 seconds.  Even vehicles with four 
wheel or all wheel drive do not have good traction on ice.  All vehicles have difficulty 
stopping, going through curves, and changing lanes on winter roads. 
• Be especially careful near snowplows—they are hard to see because of the blowing 
snow they create. They are wider than other vehicles, and often move more slowly.   
• Travel in the day, don’t travel alone, and keep others informed of your route and 
schedule.  Stay on main roads—avoid back road shortcuts. 
• Be prepared.  Items you should keep in your vehicle include:  windshield scraper and 
brush, small shovel, kitty litter or sand, extra clothing, food and water, cell phone, 
extra windshield washer fluid, a basic first aid kit, and flashlight.  Always have at 
least a half tank of gas in your vehicle. 
 
If you are caught in a blizzard or stranded 
• Pull off the highway. Turn on hazard lights and hang a distress flag from the door 
handle, an antenna or window. 
• Remain in your vehicle where rescuers are most likely to find you. Do not set out on 
foot unless you can see a building close by where you know you can take shelter.  Be 
careful: distances are distorted by blowing snow. A building may seem close, but 
actually be too far to walk to in deep snow. 
• Run the engine and heater about 10 minutes each hour to keep warm. When the engine 
is running, open a downwind window slightly for ventilation. To help protect from 
possible carbon monoxide poisoning, keep snow clear from the exhaust pipe. 
• Exercise to maintain body heat, but avoid overdoing it.  In extreme cold, use road 
maps, seat covers, and floor mats for insulation. Huddle with passengers, and use 
your coat for a blanket. 
• Take turns sleeping. One person should be awake at all times to look for rescue crews. 
• Drink fluids to avoid dehydration. However, do not drink alcohol. 
• Be careful not to waste battery power. Balance electrical energy needs—the use of 
lights, heat, and radio—with supply. 
• Turn on the inside light at night so work crews or rescuers can see you. 
• If stranded in a remote area, stomp large block letters in an open area spelling out 
HELP or SOS, and line them with rocks or tree limbs to attract the attention of rescue 
personnel who may be searching the area by airplane. 
 
 

48 
Skidding 
Most skids are caused by the driver's failure to react in time to adjust the vehicle's 
speed to road and traffic conditions. These conditions may include snow, ice, rain, 
dirt/gravel, and wet leaves. Do not use cruise control in these situations.  In a rear-wheel 
drive vehicle, you can usually feel a loss of traction or the beginning of a skid. There may 
be no such warning in a front-wheel drive, however. Front-wheel drives do handle better 
in snow, but they do not have flawless traction, and skids can occur unexpectedly. Don’t 
let the better feel and handling of a front-wheel drive vehicle cause you to drive faster 
than you should.      
 
How to Avoid Skidding 
 On roads that may be slippery you should drive at a slower speed.   Don’t make any 
sudden changes in speed or direction.  To slow down on a slippery road, you should take 
your foot off the gas pedal to lower your speed and help keep your vehicle under control. 
If you need to slow down more, gently “squeeze” your brakes with a slow, steady 
pressure. Allow the wheels to keep rolling.  If they start to lock up, ease off the brake 
pedal. As you slow down, it may also be helpful to shift into a lower gear.  If your vehicle 
is equipped with anti-lock brakes use steady brake pressure, do not pump the brakes! 
Follow the instructions in your owner's manual. 
 
How to Control a Vehicle in a Skid  
The best approach to recovering from a skid is the same for both front and rear-wheel 
drive vehicles: 
 Don’t hit the brakes, it will just make the skid worse. 
 Steer in the direction you want the vehicle to go.  
 You might have to steer left and right a few times to get your vehicle completely 
under control. 
 
 
NOTE: Vehicle improvements, such as stability control, may also help you handle your 
vehicle, but they cannot be a substitute for driver caution. Four-wheel drive and all-wheel 
drive vehicles have better traction in snow, but not on ice. Be wary of over-confidence 
using these vehicles.   
No matter what type of vehicle you have, it’s a good idea to go to an empty parking 
lot and learn how your vehicle handles on icy or snowy surfaces. 
  
Anti-lock Brakes 
Anti-lock brakes are an important breakthrough in safety. They allow you to brake 
and steer at the same time.   Expect noise and vibration in the brake pedal.  Don’t pump 

49 
the brake or take your foot off the brake pedal because it will disengage the anti-lock 
system. 
Your owner’s manual will tell you if your vehicle has ABS.  Also, an ABS warning 
light will display briefly on your instrument panel when you start your vehicle. 
 
Note:  If your ABS light stays on after you begin to drive, your vehicle’s ABS system is 
not working.  However, the vehicle does still have brakes. 
 
Reduced Visibility 
 
Daytime Driving   
Studies have shown that driving with low beam headlights on during the daytime 
reduces the risk of head-on collisions by more than 20%.  Automobile manufacturers 
have installed daytime running lights on many vehicles. These lights come on 
automatically and should not be confused with your headlights. Daytime running lights 
and headlights can help other drivers to see your vehicle during daylight hours.  
Remember, when snow, rain, and fog limit visibility you must turn your headlights on.  
The best practice is to always drive with at least your low beam headlights on, even in 
the daytime. 
 
Note: Parking lights are to be used only when your vehicle is parked. 
 
Night Driving 
It is more dangerous to drive at night than in the daytime because you cannot see as 
far ahead at night.  The law requires headlights on vehicles to be turned on a half hour 
after sunset to a half hour before sunrise. Be sure to turn on your headlights—your 
daytime running lights may give you the impression that your headlights are on.   
You always need to be able to see 4 seconds ahead.  When driving at night at 40 miles 
an hour, with low beam headlights, you are “overdriving your headlights”.  This means 
that you cannot see far enough ahead to stop in the space you can see, and you may not 
be able to avoid a collision.  
 
USE HIGH AND LOW HEADLIGHT BEAMS PROPERLY 
 
Use high beam when driving in the open country with few other vehicles.  Even with 
the high beams, speed must be lower than by day. 
Always use low beam when approaching other vehicles or pedestrians so as not to 
blind the driver or pedestrian. Also use low beam when driving in areas with streetlights 
or fog and when following another vehicle. 
 
Courteous Drivers Dim Their Headlights    
When driving a motor vehicle at night, you should promptly dim your headlights 
when meeting or following another vehicle 
 
Approaching Headlights       
If you look directly at oncoming lights, you could be blinded for several seconds.  To 
avoid being temporarily blinded, you should look ahead towards the right edge of the 

50 
highway until the bright lights have gone by and your vision has returned to normal. This 
practice will also help you detect bicyclists or pedestrians who may be close to the edge 
of the road. 
 
INTERSTATE DRIVING 
 
Interstates are multiple-lane, divided roads designed for high-speed travel. In various 
areas they are known as expressways, throughways, turnpikes, toll roads, limited access 
highways or freeways. Some are free, and some require payment of a toll. 
They all have several important advantages. They are multi-lane and controlled-
access roads upon which you may drive for very long distances without interruption. 
These roads are designed for quicker and safer travel. It is important that you learn to use 
these roads properly. 
 
Speed-Change Lanes (Acceleration and Deceleration) 
There are lanes running alongside the Interstate for a short distance, which connect 
entrance or exit ramps (roads) to the interstate. These 
are made for vehicles to speed up or slow down when 
entering or exiting the traffic lanes.  
 
Entrance Ramp 
     This is a short one-way road that leads onto the 
interstate. You need to look carefully to enter into fast moving traffic. The entrance ramp 
takes you to the acceleration lane where vehicles are moving up to interstate speeds. Stay 
to the right, signal left, speed up, check blind spot over left shoulder and make a lane 
change when the travel lane is safe. The entering driver must yield to drivers already on 
the interstate.  
 
Exit Ramp 
This is a short one-way road which connects the interstate to another road and allows 
you to exit at a safe speed. When leaving an interstate 
you should signal for a lane change, move to the 
deceleration lane closest to the exit, and slow down to 
the posted exit speed. 
 
Safe Driving on the Interstate  
1. Keep your eyes moving to know what is going on around you, and check your 
mirrors often. 
2. Don't tailgate. The easiest way to tell if you are a safe distance from the vehicle ahead 
of you is to use the 4-second distance rule. If the road is wet or slippery you will 
need additional space. 
3. Let other drivers know what you are going to do before you do it. Never slow down 
or change lanes suddenly.  Frequent lane changes are unsafe. 
4. Before changing lanes or passing, check your mirrors, signal, and check the blind 
spots in the direction in which you intend to move. 

51 
5. Never stop in the traffic lane. It is illegal to stop on an interstate unless it is an 
emergency. If you must stop for an emergency, move into the breakdown lane and 
as far to the right as possible. If you need help, raise the hood of your vehicle, tie a 
white cloth on the vehicle, and stay in your vehicle. 
6. You should drive in the right lane unless you are passing another vehicle or a sign 
indicates otherwise. 
7. Do not drive when tired. Driving when tired is a major cause of crashes on interstates.  
If you do become tired, it is important that you stop and rest in a safe area as soon as 
possible.  
8. Icy and snow covered interstates and their ramps can be very dangerous. Remember 
to slow down and drive with care. Also, bridges and overpasses may be more 
slippery than the main road. 
9. If you miss your exit ramp, never stop and back up and never use the emergency 
turnaround. These crossovers are for emergency and maintenance vehicles only. Go 
on to the next exit. 
10. Never use cruise control in driving conditions such as rain, fog, snow, ice, etc. 
11. When you are approaching any law enforcement, emergency, or repair vehicle with 
a flashing light on the side of the road, slow down.  The law says you must proceed 
with caution and make a lane change away from the emergency vehicle as soon as it 
is safe to do so. If you are unable to change lanes you must slow down to 20 mph 
below the speed limit in order to go by the stopped vehicles. 
 
What does it indicate if, while driving on a divided highway, the edge of the highway to 
your right is painted yellow? You are going the WRONG WAY on a divided highway or 
Interstate. On a divided highway the line to your right should be white. 
 
 
 
 
PASSING 
 
When approaching another vehicle or bicycle from the rear and you want to pass, be 
sure you have enough distance to pass safely.  Signal left to let other drivers know that 
you will be pulling out, look to the rear to see if your vehicle is being passed  (look in the 
rearview mirrors and over your left shoulder to check the blind spot), change lanes and 
pass on the left. At night it might be necessary to blink your headlights from low to high 
to low beam to warn the driver in front of you that you intend to pass.  
If you are passing while towing a trailer, be especially careful that you are well past 
the motor vehicle or bicycle you are passing before pulling back into their lane of travel.  

52 
When towing a wide load or driving a motor vehicle that is wider than usual, be especially 
careful if you pass any other motorist or bicyclist. 
Pass vehicles and bicycles on the left.   Leave at least four feet of clearance between 
your vehicle and any vehicle or bicycle you are passing.  You should go far enough 
beyond the motor vehicle or bicycle you are passing so that you are able to see the entire 
front of the motor vehicle or the bicyclist in your inside rearview mirror.  Use your right 
signal, check the right blind spot over your shoulder, and return to the right side of the 
road.   When you are being passed by another vehicle, you should slow a little and keep 
right. This will allow the other driver to pass more safely.      
A driver may pass on the right of another vehicle on a multilane road. On roads that 
are not multilane, a driver may pass on the right of a vehicle or bicycle turning or 
preparing to turn left, if there is room to go by safely. Under no conditions can a motor 
vehicle be passed by driving off the pavement or main traveled part of the road. 
 
DO NOT PASS AT THESE LOCATIONS 
 Hills 
 Curves 
 Railroads 
 Intersections 
 If you see a “changed path ahead” 
 
IMPAIRED DRIVING 
 
While most drivers think only of alcohol when they hear the word impaired, drinking 
is not the only way a driver can be impaired.  Drugs, even prescription and over the 
counter drugs, can seriously affect your ability to drive safely.  Driving while drowsy can 
also affect your ability to drive and can be very dangerous. 
 
Alcohol and other drugs 
The drinking driver is the number one cause of fatal traffic crashes. On average 
someone is killed by a drunk driver every 40 minutes. 
It is against the law to drive while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.  
Drivers who have been drinking or using other drugs do not have good control over 
themselves or the vehicle and they are a danger to their own lives and the lives of others.  
Vermont law states that when a person's blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is .08 or 
above, he/she is “under the influence” or “impaired”. It is important to remember that a 
person is impaired at blood alcohol concentration levels below .08.  Even one drink 
impairs your judgment. 
People under the age of 21 who operate a vehicle with an alcohol concentration of 
.02 or more can receive a civil traffic violation. The Driver’s License will be suspended 
and the driver must complete an alcohol and driving education program at their own 
expense.     
 

53 
What Does Alcohol Do To Your Driving Skills? 
Alcohol is a drug; it can and will affect your driving. When alcohol has been 
consumed, the decisions that you make may very well be faulty.  Alcohol may appear to 
give you a lift; it does not. It does affect your thought process. Alcohol, in fact, is a 
depressant; it will affect you in the following ways: 
 Judgment- You may no longer be able to make good decisions about driving.  You 
may think you are fine, but you are not aware of the risks you may be taking. 
 Vision - Your overall vision may be greatly reduced.  
 Concentration - Your mind wanders, and you can't concentrate. 
 Understanding - Your comprehension level about what is happening around you will 
suffer. You may not realize what you are doing. 
 Feelings (Senses) - Your feelings are suppressed; you don't feel speed so you won't 
realize that you could be speeding. 
 Reaction time - It will take you longer to react and move your foot from the gas pedal 
to the brake. This slowed-down reaction time can be the difference between arriving 
safely or not arriving at all. 
Time is the only way to reduce the effects of alcohol.  Drinking coffee, taking a cold 
shower or running around will not sober a person up.  It takes at least an hour per drink 
for the alcohol and its effects to be processed out of your body.  This means you may 
have to wait several hours to reduce the effects of alcohol to enable you to drive safely.     
 
Other Drugs 
Driving after taking other drugs or narcotics (even from prescription and over the 
counter) can be just as deadly as alcohol, even more so for some persons. Drugs may 
cause you to become sleepy and keep you from thinking or acting properly. Feeling this 
way while driving a vehicle sets you up for death on the highway. Again, time is the only 
way to reduce the effects of any drug. 
If you are convicted of DUI or driving after taking drugs, your license will be 
suspended. You must pay a large fine, lawyer fees, pay for an alcohol education class, 
you may go to jail and your insurance will increase.       
Vermont has an "Implied Consent" Law - This means that when a person gets a 
license, that person is agreeing to say "yes" when asked to take a test to see how much 
alcohol or other drugs are in the person's body. A police officer may ask a driver to take 
the test if the officer thinks the driver is impaired by alcohol or other drugs. If the driver 
refuses, they will lose their Driver's License for at least six (6) months. 
 
NOTE: Vermont has an administrative suspension process, which means that you can 
lose your license through a civil process before a criminal DUI conviction. 
         
THINK BEFORE YOU DRINK! 
 
If you are going to drink, make plans before you start 
 Use a designated driver and make sure that driver doesn't drink. A designated driver 
agrees not to drink or use other drugs, and is responsible for getting the others home 
safely. 
 Call a parent, or other responsible person to arrange a safe ride home. 

54 
 Arrange to stay overnight where you are, if it is safe to do so. 
 Listen to your friends. If they warn you about not driving, take their concern seriously.  
 Before you begin drinking, give your vehicle keys to a friend who does not drink, and 
who will not let you drive after drinking. 
Time is the only way to reduce the effects of alcohol. It takes at least an hour per 
drink for the alcohol and its effects to be processed out of your body. This 
means you may have to wait several hours to reduce the affects of alcohol to 
enable you to drive safely. Drinking coffee, taking a shower, exercising, etc., 
cannot reduce your BAC or the effects of alcohol. 
The Vermont Emergency Nurses Association (ENCARE) sponsors the 
installation of signs at the site of alcohol related fatal crashes.  When you see one of these 
signs, it means someone died at that location because of a drunk driver. 
If you are concerned by your drinking, contact VT Helplink. VT Helplink is a free 
and confidential alcohol and drug support and referral service provided by the Vermont 
Department of Health. A caring, trained specialist will help you or your loved one take a 
step toward recovery. 
Visit VTHelplink.org or call 802-565-LINK (or toll-free 833-565-LINK) 
 
 
Drowsy Driving  
Each year, many crashes occur because the driver falls asleep at the wheel.  This may 
result in a head on crash with another vehicle, a tree or other roadside object.   Drowsy 
drivers can drive so poorly they may appear to be drunk. 
Some signs of drowsy driving are: 
 Having problems focusing or keeping your eyes open 
 Yawning repeatedly 
 Not remembering the last few miles you drove 
 Drifting out of the travel lane 
 Missing traffic signs 
People most at risk of drowsy driving are those who drive after not having enough 
sleep.  Often this includes young people, shift workers and people who work very long 
hours.  It also includes people who may or may not realize they have a sleep disorder.    
Drivers may know they are tired but believe they can stay awake. Unfortunately, instead 
of staying awake they may fall asleep and crash.  
Avoid driving when drowsy.  If you become drowsy while you’re on the road, find a 
safe place to pull over and stop. Opening your window and turning up your radio will not 
keep you awake.  In fact, when you start trying to find a way to stay awake, that should 
be a sure sign you need to stop and rest.          
 
DISTRACTED DRIVING 
 
Studies show that anything that takes away your attention from driving could result 
in a crash. 
No matter what the distraction, drivers who are distracted exhibit the same basic type 
of behavior. Distractions cause drivers to react more slowly to traffic conditions or 
events, such as a vehicle stopping to make a left turn or pulling out from a side road.  

55 
Distracted drivers fail more often to recognize potential hazards such as pedestrians, 
bicyclists or debris in the road. Distracted Drivers also decrease their “margin of safety”, 
leading them to take risks they might not otherwise take, such as turning left in front of 
oncoming traffic. Inattention and failure to yield are the most common driver contributing 
actions in pedestrian and bicycle motor vehicle crashes in Vermont. 
 
Dealing with Distractions      
 Pre-program your favorite radio stations for easy access and keep your stereo at a 
volume low enough so you can hear things outside of your vehicle, such as a siren, 
horn honking, or a train whistle.  
 Designate a front-seat passenger to serve as a “co-pilot,” rather than fumble with 
maps or navigation systems. If you are driving alone, map out destinations in advance. 
 Avoid eating and drinking while driving. Make sure all food items are secure and 
drinks fit securely in cup holders. 
 Do not underestimate how distracting children can be in the vehicle. Teach them the 
importance of good behavior while in a vehicle. 
 Take a break if you find yourself “lost in thought” while driving. 
 Remember to focus on driving and avoid being distracted by people or objects inside 
and outside your vehicle. 
 Do your personal grooming at home, not in the vehicle. 
 Pets can be distracting and should be in a carrier, not in your lap or free to move. 
 Smoking is a distraction. Avoid smoking while driving. 
 
Dealing with Emotions         
Emotions affect safe driving. You may not be able to drive well if you are overly 
worried, excited, afraid, angry or depressed.   
Give yourself time to cool off and calm down. Taking a walk is a good way to do this. 
Plan ahead.  Give yourself some extra time for your driving trip. Leave a few minutes 
early.  If you have plenty of time, you are less likely to speed or break laws or crash. 
 
Cell Phones and other Electronic Devices 
• 
It is against the law for drivers to read or send messages while driving. 
• 
It is against the law for drivers to use a portable electronic device while operating a 
motor vehicle on a public highway in Vermont, including while the vehicle is 
stationary  
• 
A person who violates this law shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and 
not more than $200.00 for a first violation, and of not less than $250.00 and not more 
than $500.00 for a second or subsequent violation. 
• 
A person convicted of violating this section while operating within a properly 
designated work zone in which construction, maintenance, or utility personnel are 
present shall have two points assessed against his or her driving record for a first 
conviction and five points assessed for a second or subsequent conviction. 
• 
Recognize that driving requires your full attention. 
• 
If a call needs to be made, ask a passenger in the vehicle to place the call for you or 
stop at a safe place before making your call. 

56 
• 
Don’t answer your cell phone. Let the caller leave a message, and return calls when 
stopped at a safe location. 
• 
Secure your phone in the vehicle so that it does not become a projectile in a crash. 
 
THE ROAD (SKILLS) TEST 
 
When you take the licensing road test the examiner will watch to see if you can drive 
a motor vehicle safely, courteously and correctly.  You must also demonstrate you 
understand and can follow the rules of the road.   
 
Stopping and Starting On a Hill 
When you take your road test, the examiner will have you stop and start on a hill. You 
will be instructed to drive to the right side of the road, stop, and then set your 
parking/emergency brake and shift to neutral. Be sure to signal right to tell others what 
you are doing. The parking/emergency brake must hold the vehicle from rolling back. 
Before driving up the hill, put the vehicle in gear. Signal left. Check your mirrors and 
left blind spot to be sure that traffic is clear. Accelerate gently until you feel the vehicle 
want to move and then release the parking brake if your vehicle’s parking brake is not 
designed to automatically disengage and look over your left shoulder once again before 
driving out. You should be able to drive up the hill without rolling back. 
Some vehicles have a hill assist function, and some parking brakes will automatically 
disengage when you apply the accelerator.  Perform the hill start the way your vehicle is 
meant to. 
 
NOTE: You may need to stop on a hill for a stop sign, traffic light, or an emergency such 
as a dog running into the street. To prevent a rollback when starting on a hill, a driver can 
use any of these following techniques: 
• Quickly move your foot from the brake to the gas. 
• Set your parking/emergency brake. Move your right foot to the gas. Apply the gas 
lightly and carefully release the parking/emergency brake to continue up the hill. 
 
NOTE:  When driving downhill, you should not coast with the clutch to the floor or the 
gearshift in neutral. 
 
Turning Around 
When you take your driving test, you will be required to demonstrate the following 
procedure for turning around, using a side street. 
1. As you approach the side street on your right as instructed by the examiner, reduce 
speed and check for traffic in all directions. Turn on your directional light so other 
drivers will know what you are doing. 
Drive just past the street and stop about 
18 inches from the curb or edge of the 
road. Shift into reverse.  Check for traffic 
in all directions before backing.  Be sure 
to check your blind spots.   
2. When the side street is clear, back slowly into it.  Be careful to keep on your own 
side of the street. Look mostly through the rear window while backing. Stop backing 

57 
when your vehicle is all the way into the side street beyond any crosswalks or stop 
lines.   
3. Before you turn back out on to the street, signal left and shift to drive.  When there 
are no vehicles coming, make a proper left turn to complete the turnaround. 
 
 
Always look in back of you and back the vehicle slowly. Never back across an 
intersection. Remember, when you are backing your vehicle you are responsible for 
traffic in all directions!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  There are several other options for turning your vehicle around.  The choice you 
make depends on traffic conditions and whether or not it is legal. Going around the block 
or using a parking lot is the safest option.  
 
Parallel Parking 
You will also be required to parallel park during your road test. 
 
Entering the Parking Space 
When approaching the parking space, check your rearview mirror and signal right.  
Stop alongside the front vehicle, two to three feet away.  Shift to reverse.  Check for 
traffic and pedestrians in all directions before backing.  Look over your left shoulder to 
check the blind spot. 
Using the pictures below as a guide, maneuver your vehicle into the space. There are 
several methods to accomplish this.  All methods require steering fully right to fully left 
and looking through the rear window while backing slowly. Slowly pull forward to center 
vehicle in space. 
 
 
 
Leaving the Parking Space 
If necessary, back up the vehicle to a position from which re-entry into the traffic lane 
can be made in one motion.  Signal left, look all around for any vehicles, bicyclists and 
pedestrians (check the rearview and side view mirrors, and look over your left shoulder 

58 
into the blind spot).  When clear, drive out carefully. Enter the roadway slowly, being 
careful to stay on your own side. 
Note:  On the road test, you may be required to parallel park with only a front vehicle 
available.  Be sure to still follow the same procedures. 
 
CRASHES 
 
 
Poor decisions made by drivers cause most crashes.  Some examples are:  
1. Driving too fast for road conditions. 
2. Not paying attention to their driving. 
3. Driving too close to the motor vehicle in front of them. 
4. Driving over the center line. 
5. Not yielding the right-of-way. 
6. Driving after drinking or using other drugs. 
7. Passing when unsafe to do so. 
8. Not checking mirrors and blind spots.  
 
What to Do After a Crash 
A driver who has been involved in a crash is required by law to stop and give any 
assistance that is reasonably necessary.  Often those involved in crash scenes are 
confused and upset, so be prepared for crash situations. It is helpful to review the steps 
which should be taken at a crash scene.  
1. If possible, move the involved vehicles out of the traveled lanes and onto the 
shoulder. This will reduce the chance of someone else crashing into the involved 
vehicles, causing additional damage and injury. 
2. If someone is injured, call 911.  Leave the injured person where they are.  You may 
injure the person more by moving that person the wrong way.  Keep the person warm 
and calm. 
3. A police officer will respond to a 911 call and will view the crash scene. The police 
officer can obtain the facts about what 
happened. The police will not take sides for 
one driver or the other. You will have to show 
your license, proof of valid registration and 
insurance to the police officer.  You must also 
show your license to anyone who is injured or whose property has been damaged. 
4. If you hit a parked vehicle and cause damage, and you can't find the owner, you must 
write your name, address and phone number and leave it in, or on the vehicle.  This 
will allow the owner to know whom to contact.   
5. If any person has been injured, or if the damage is over $3,000, you must make a 
written report to the Department of Motor Vehicles within 72 hours. Crash reports 
help the state improve roadways. 
 
Crash Reports               
You can get a Vermont Crash Report at any Vermont Police Department or by 
contacting the Department of Motor Vehicles, 120 State Street, Montpelier, VT 05603, 
by phone at 802.828.2000, on line or at a DMV office. These are some things you should 
note carefully if you have a crash. 

59 
1. Exactly where it happened. 
2. In a city, note the names of the streets if the crash was at an intersection, or the 
number of the nearest house to the crash. 
3. Outside cities, locations are more difficult to identify but are just as important.   
4. Find out the name of the nearest town, the route number or the name of the road you 
are on, and the name of, and how far it is to, the nearest crossroad. Note how far it is 
from something such as a telephone pole (if it has a number), end of bridge, farm 
house, railroad crossing or nearest number of the Interstate. 
5. Mile markers can be used to pinpoint the exact location of a crash scene. Use this 
information to help the police when reporting a crash. 
6. Time of crash. 
7. Explain what damage occurred. 
8. Explain what injuries were sustained in the crash. 
9. Get the name, address, license and registration numbers of the other driver.  It is also 
good to get the names and addresses of the persons in the other motor vehicle and 
all persons who saw the crash.     
     If you have a crash with another vehicle, the other driver has the right to see your 
license, registration and insurance information.                             
 
Note: If a Vermont driver has a crash in another state, it must be reported in the 
state where the crash happened.  
 
YOU MUST TAKE PROPER CARE OF YOUR VEHICLES 
 
Inspection 
Your vehicle must be inspected once a year. Inspection makes sure that your vehicle 
is checked at least once a year, but you must keep it running properly at all times. If your 
vehicle is not running properly, you may be found at fault in case of a crash. 
The inspection sticker indicates when you have to get the next inspection. All motor 
vehicles have to be inspected within 15 days of registration, unless bearing a valid 
Vermont inspection sticker.  
 
The following equipment should be safe, in good working order, and 
properly adjusted: 
 
Brakes 
After a time brakes become worn out and must have new linings. Oil or grease may 
leak into the brakes and make them grab. Water may get into them from driving in wet 
weather so they will not properly stop the vehicle. Dirt from dusty roads may work in 
and wear them out. Using the brakes often on a long trip in hilly country will cause them 
to overheat, and then they will not work properly. Brakes must be checked at regular 
intervals. 
The most common cause of bad brakes is that they do not operate together properly. 
When applying the brakes suddenly, one takes hold before the other and causes your 
vehicle to swerve. You can check this yourself by noting whether the vehicle swerves 
when traveling at a slow speed on a road with no other vehicles in sight and you are 
holding the steering wheel lightly. 

60 
Be sure to see that there is plenty of fluid in the brake system. If you notice that the 
brake pedal goes down too far, have the brake fluid checked at once as there may be a 
leak in the system. 
 
Tires 
Tires must have at least 2/32" of tread depth. It is not safe or legal to use tires after 
the tread is worn off or worn down to the wear bars on the tire.  
Hold a penny with Abraham Lincoln's body between your thumb and forefinger. 
Place Lincoln's head first into the deepest looking groove. Can you see all of his 
head? If yes, your tires are too worn-don't drive on them, and make sure to get 
them replaced. 
Be sure to keep the right amount of air in your tires.  Both overinflated and 
underinflated tires reduce traction, cause quicker tire wear, and affect steering.  If your 
vehicle pulls to one side or steers hard look at your tires and have your wheels checked. 
Wavy marks on your front tires may mean that the wheels are out of alignment. The safe 
thing to do is to have all good tires with the proper amount of tread. 
 
Steering 
If it becomes difficult to steer your vehicle, or your steering wheel moves too loosely, 
you should have it checked by a qualified mechanic. A good rule is to get your steering 
and what mechanics call "the front end" looked over two times a year. 
 
Lights 
Your headlights must be kept working properly.  Headlights working properly and 
used properly show that the driver is thinking of the safety of other drivers. If your 
headlights are dim, aimed too low, or dirty, you will not be able to see as far ahead as 
you should. If the lights are aimed too high or do not go to low beam when a vehicle 
comes toward you, your headlights may blind the other driver.   
Tail lights, stop lights, directional lights, and parking lights should always be working 
properly. The back license plate must be lighted so it can be seen and read at least 50 feet 
from the back of the vehicle. When bulbs burn out, they should be replaced right away 
with the manufacturer’s recommended replacements. 
 
 
Windshield Wipers 
You must have windshield wipers which work properly.  Keep your windshield clean, 
as it improves your vision both for day and nighttime driving.   
 
 
Windows and Defrosters 
All defrosters—front and rear—must be in good working order. Do not try to drive 
any vehicle unless the window interiors are free of moisture and outside windows are 
clear of ice and snow.  Also keep interiors of all windows clean.  
 
 
Exhaust System      
The exhaust system must not leak. Leaking exhausts have often caused carbon 
monoxide poisoning or death by allowing carbon monoxide gas to enter the passenger 
area of the vehicle. You cannot smell carbon monoxide gas.  If you become drowsy or 
nauseous, it could indicate carbon monoxide poisoning.  

61 
Speedometer and Odometer 
The speedometer and odometer in your vehicle must be working properly and must 
be where the driver can see them. Federal law states that the numbers on an odometer 
must not be altered and an odometer statement must be signed by the seller and purchaser 
when the vehicle is sold.  
 
Other Things to Keep In Mind   
A driver has to be able to see clearly to the front and sides of the vehicle, so nothing 
should be in the way. Objects carried in the vehicle, passengers, or pets should not be in 
the driver's way while driving. You must have a rearview mirror and a horn.  The law 
states there shall not be anything hanging from the rearview mirror or sun visors. 
 
Emission Control System   
Motor vehicles are a major source of air pollution in Vermont. Collectively they 
account for over 50% of the air pollution generated in Vermont. Although new vehicles 
are much cleaner (provided they are maintained properly) than older models, they still 
release large amounts of pollutants into our air. To make sure that your vehicle’s emission 
control system is functioning properly, it is checked as part of the annual inspection 
procedure.   
As part of the annual inspection the catalytic converter is inspected to make sure it is 
present on your vehicle. If your vehicle is supposed to have a catalytic converter and it is 
not present or if the catalytic converter fails, it must be replaced.  It is against federal and 
state law to disconnect your vehicles catalytic converter or to have a mechanic disconnect 
or tamper with it. 
Another way that vehicles cause air pollution is through the evaporation of gas. 
During the annual inspection your vehicle’s gas cap will be examined to make sure it is 
in good condition. 
The On Board Diagnostic computer system (OBD) will be checked to make sure the 
vehicle’s emissions control system is working properly.  Specific problem areas can be 
pinpointed through a properly functioning “OBD”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To find out more about vehicle emissions and what you can do to help keep 
Vermont’s air as clean as possible, visit the Agency of Natural Resources web site. 
 
Questions about the annual inspection program can be directed to the 
Department of Motor Vehicles at (802) 828-2094. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
Safety Belts 
 
The law requires all occupants of a motor vehicle to be restrained with a safety belt, 
or a federally approved child passenger restraining system.          
 
Wearing Your Safety Belt 
 
When wearing a safety belt (or seat belt), you are less likely to be injured or killed in 
a collision.  Safety belts make it easier to sit in a safe, comfortable position for better 
control of the vehicle; safety belts hold you in the position motor vehicle makers intended 
you to be. 
Safety belts are most effective when used properly. Lap belts should fit snugly across 
the hips, not over the stomach.  Shoulder belts go over the shoulder and across the center 
of the chest.  Seatbelt extensions are available from the vehicle manufacturer.  Never tuck 
a shoulder belt under your arm or behind your back. Safety belts are designed to cross 
your body at its strongest points in order to keep you safe in a motor vehicle crash. Safety 
belts keep you inside the vehicle, in one position, rather than being thrown out of the 
vehicle where the instances of death and serious injury are much greater. The use of 
safety belts keeps occupants in one position within the vehicle where the chances of 
injury from other occupants are also limited in a crash. 
 
 
Protect Your Child – It’s the Law! 
 
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for children aged 3 to 14. Parents 
and caregivers are urged to make sure their car seats and booster seats 
are properly installed in their vehicles to prevent injuries and deaths 
among their children. 
Too often, parents are confused about how to install their child’s 
seat correctly, don’t know that every seat doesn’t fit in every car, or 
don’t realize that their vehicle is equipped with the Lower Anchors 
and Tethers for Children (LATCH) system. 
Visit Be Seat Smart for more information on choosing a proper 
seat or to find a Free Child Safety Seat Inspection site near you.  
 
 
Child Restraint Systems 23 V.S.A. § 1258 
 
• 
A child under two years of age must be properly secured in a federally approved 
rear-facing child car seat with a harness. 
• 
A child in a rear-facing car seat must not ride in front of an active airbag. 
• 
A child over 2 but under five years of age must be properly secured in a federally 
approved rear-facing or forward-facing car seat with a harness. 

63 
• 
A child under eight years of age who is not properly secured in a harnessed car seat 
must be properly secured in a booster seat. 
• 
A child under 13 years of age must, if practical, ride in the back seat. 
• 
A child under 18 years of age who is not properly secured in a harnessed car seat or 
booster seat must be wearing a seat belt. 
 
 
NOTE: Never place a child’s safety seat in front of an air bag! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
Chapter 8 - Point System 
 
The Vermont Point System 
 
Points are put on your driving record each time you are found guilty of breaking a 
motor vehicle law. For example you are given points for the following offenses: 
1. Speeding, 2 - 8 points depending on your speed over the speed limit. 
2. Texting while driving, 2 - 5 points. 
3. Driving without a license, 2 points. 
4. Failure to stop for a stop sign or red light, 2 points. 
5. Failure to obey a police officer, 4 points. 
6. Failure to yield the right of way to an ambulance, fire truck, police officer, 5  
points. 
7. Failure to yield the right of way to a pedestrian in a crosswalk, 4 points. 
8. Failure to stop for a school bus that has stopped with the red warning lights 
flashing, 5 points.   
 
When a driver receives a total of 10 points, a letter will be sent notifying the driver 
that their privilege to drive is to be suspended. A hearing may be requested to verify the 
convictions and the number of points accrued. The number of points received within 2 
years will determine how long your driving privilege will be suspended. The more points 
received - the longer the period of suspension. Points are not assessed for parking or 
defective equipment violations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
Chapter 9 – Vehicle Ownership 
 
HOW TO REGISTER YOUR VEHICLE 
This is basic information on vehicle registration. For detailed information please call 
802.828.2000 or visit us online at dmv.vermont.gov. If you live in Vermont and have a 
vehicle that you want to drive on the roads, you must register it. If you are moving to 
Vermont from another state, you must register your vehicle within 60 days of moving 
into the state. 
 
Registration and Plates 
Proof of valid registration must always be in the vehicle when it is being used. A 
police officer has the right to see it. The registration plates must be properly affixed so 
that they will not become loose. No portion of the registration plates should be covered 
or hidden from view, and they must be kept clean at all times. The rear plate must be 
lighted so that it can be read from at least 50 feet away. The number plates you get must 
only be used for that vehicle. You may transfer them to a new vehicle that you buy if you 
trade in or sell your old vehicle. 
  
Selling your vehicle to someone else: 
1. Give the new owner a bill of sale that includes the purchaser(s) name, seller(s) 
signature, date of sale, and the year, make, serial number and amount of money you 
were paid for the vehicle. 
2. Sign the back of the title showing the new owner's name and address. Also fill in the 
mileage of the vehicle and the date of sale. 
3. An odometer statement is required to be signed by both seller and buyer on all sales 
of vehicles model year 2011 or newer. This statement is included on your vehicle 
title and/or the Vermont Bill of Sale. 
4. Remove your registration plates from the vehicle. 
 
Trading your vehicle: 
1. Give the new owner a bill of sale that includes the purchaser(s) name, seller(s) 
signature, date of sale, and the year, make, serial number and amount you were paid 
or allowed for a trade in on your old vehicle. 
2. Have the person you are trading with give you a bill of sale for the vehicle you are 
getting. This should have the information about the vehicle you traded for. Have the 
title to the vehicle properly signed over to you.  
3. Remove your registration plates from the old vehicle. If you want to transfer your 
registration, put the plates on the vehicle you just purchased. 
4. Fill out an Application for Registration, Tax and Title, include the title for the vehicle 
you just bought. Mail these forms with a check or money order for the correct fees 
to the Department of Motor Vehicles in Montpelier within 24 hours. 
 
Lost Registration or Registration Plates 
If you lose your registration certificate you can get a replacement from the 
Department of Motor Vehicles at any of our offices, by mail or online at 
dmv.vermont.gov.  

66 
If you lose one or both of your registration plates, pick up a Replacement Plate 
Application from any Department of Motor Vehicles office, a police station, or online at 
dmv.vermont.gov.  
 
Name/Address/Vehicle Changes 
If you change your name, your address or the color of your vehicle, you are required 
to notify the Department of Motor Vehicles within 30 days. 
 
Purchase and Use Tax 
 
Non-Leased Vehicles 
When you buy a new or used vehicle, you have to pay a tax. This is called a Purchase 
and Use Tax and is 6% of the price you paid for the non-leased vehicle or the current fair 
market value, whichever is greater. 
New residents of Vermont applying for registration for the first time on a motor 
vehicle acquired outside the State of Vermont on which a sales or use tax has been paid 
by the person applying for registration in Vermont, or their spouse, will be exempt from 
the Vermont Purchase and Use Tax upon providing proof that the tax paid in another 
jurisdiction is equal to or greater than the Vermont tax or if the vehicle has been registered 
in a jurisdiction which collects Purchase or Use tax for at least 3 years. If the tax paid in 
another jurisdiction is less than the Vermont tax, the tax due shall be the difference. 
 
Leased Vehicles 
All applications for registration, tax, and/or title of a leased vehicle from a Vermont 
vehicle dealer or a Vermont vehicle dealer acting on behalf of the lessor, must be 
accompanied by a Purchase and Use Tax Computation - Leased Vehicle form (VD-147) 
or a copy of the lease agreement and/or a dealer worksheet. If the appropriate material is 
not received, the leased vehicle will be taxed at 6% of the acquisition cost.  
The taxable cost of a leased vehicle will be calculated at 6% of the acquisition cost of 
the vehicle, minus the lease end value, as stated on the Purchase and Use Tax 
Computation - Leased Vehicle form (VD-147) or as stated in the lease agreement and/or 
dealer worksheet, without regard to whether or not you have the option to purchase the 
vehicle at the end of the lease.  
 
Motor Vehicle Title Information 
All vehicles must have a Vermont Motor vehicle title. Some exceptions are: a 
motorcycle with less than 300 cc's of engine displacement and a trailer with empty weight 
of 1,500 pounds or less. 
A Manufacturer's Certificate of Origin is required for all new vehicles. You cannot 
register a vehicle without this. 
All vehicles that are being registered in Vermont must have an application for 
registration. You will also need the bill of sale and the former owner's title signed over 
to you. 
 
 
 

67 
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) 
 
The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) is the identifying code for 
a specific automobile. A VIN comprises 17 characters (digits and capital letters) that act 
as a unique identifier for the vehicle. A VIN displays the car's unique features, 
specifications, and manufacturer. Before 1981, VINs varied in length from 11 to 17 
characters. 
When Verification is Required  
• 
Vehicles with Salvage Documentation. 
• 
Vehicles that are being titled under bond. 
• 
Vehicles with registrations from any foreign country, including Canada.  
VIN Verifications must be completed in Vermont. VIN verifications are to be 
completed by a Vermont law enforcement officer, personnel employed by a law 
enforcement unit who, for this purpose, are under the direct supervision of a law 
enforcement officer, or DMV employees designated by the Vermont Commissioner of 
Motor Vehicles. 
Rebuilt Vehicles 
Any vehicle being registered in Vermont that has a SALVAGE title will be issued a 
title which will have the words REBUILT VEHICLE. When you apply to register a 
SALVAGE vehicle you must have the identification number of the vehicle checked by 
a Motor Vehicle employee or Vermont law enforcement person and have the VIN 
verification section of the application completed. 
 
Liens 
If you borrow money to buy a vehicle from a bank, credit union, or another person, 
the vehicle is said to have a "lien" on it. The person or bank you borrow money from is 
called a "lien holder." The lien holder's name must be on the registration application. The 
title to your vehicle, when issued, will be sent to the lien holder and will not be given to 
you until you pay back the money you borrowed.  
 
Insurance 
Vermont has a law called "Maintenance of Financial Responsibility." This means that 
the vehicle you drive MUST be covered by liability insurance.  
Liability and property damage are the most important type of automobile insurance 
you should have. It protects you against financial loss when bodily injury or property 
damage occurs. 
The amount of coverage MUST be at least $25,000 for death or injury of one person; 
$50,000 for death or injury of 2 or more persons; $10,000 for property damage. You must 
carry a card from your insurance company in the vehicle that shows there is insurance 
coverage on the vehicle. If you are stopped by a police officer you will have to show the 
card. If you are going to take a driving test you will also have to show the card. 
If a police officer stops you and asks to see proof of your insurance and you do not 
have insurance, the officer will give you a ticket. You will be fined and assessed two 
points on your driving record. 
If you have insurance on your vehicle and a police officer stops you, and you cannot 
show the card to the officer, you have 15 days to do so. The card you show the officer 
must say that you had insurance at the time the officer stopped you. 

68 
If you are driving without insurance and any of the following happen, your license 
will be taken away by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles until you get insurance. You 
will have to prove to the Commissioner that you have insurance for a full 3 years. 
 You are in a crash, even if it isn’t your fault, 
 Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, 
 Driving or taking another person's vehicle without the owner's consent, 
 Driving when your license is suspended, revoked, or refused, 
 Driving a vehicle in such a way as to cause the death of another person, 
 Leaving the scene of a crash 
 
Inspection (see page 62 for more detail) 
Your vehicle must be inspected once a year. Inspection makes sure that your vehicle 
is checked at least once a year, but you must keep it running properly at all times. If your 
vehicle is not running properly, you may be found at fault in case of a crash. 
The inspection sticker indicates when you have to get the next inspection. All motor 
vehicles have to be inspected within 15 days of registration, unless bearing a valid 
Vermont inspection sticker.  
 
Drive Smart and Save - “Green Driving” Tips 
Here are 10 efficient driving tips that will save you money on gas, reduce your carbon 
footprint, and conserve energy! 
 
SLOW DOWN AND WATCH SPEED - On the interstate, drive 55 or 60 miles per 
hour instead of 65 to save fuel. EPA estimates up to a 15 percent improvement in 
fuel economy by following this tip alone. 
 
ACCELERATE AND BRAKE SMOOTHLY - Accelerating smoothly from a stop and 
braking softly conserves fuel. Fast starts, weaving in and out of traffic and hard braking 
wastes fuel and wears out some of the car components, such as brakes and tires, more 
quickly. Maximize your vehicle's momentum by maintaining a safe distance between 
vehicles and anticipating traffic conditions to allow for more time to brake and accelerate 
gradually. 
 
AVOID EXCESSIVE IDLING WHEN PARKED - Idling wastes fuel, causes engine 
wear, and can cause respiratory illnesses. In winter weather, remove snow and ice from 
windows before starting the engine. Safety first: if defrosting is not adequate, increase 
warm-up time as needed. Limit stationary warm ups to 30 seconds when possible. 
Driving slowly to moderately is the most efficient way to warm up. If you're parked in 
town, idling for more than 10 seconds uses more fuel than shutting off and restarting. 
Allowing a vehicle to idle while unattended in public is in violation of Vermont's 
unattended motor vehicle law; if you leave your vehicle, you must shut it off. 
 
CHECK YOUR TIRES - Keep tires properly inflated to the recommended tire pressure 
(which can be found on the placard in the driver's side door jam of the vehicle and in the 
vehicle owner's manual). This alone can reduce the average amount of fuel use by 3-4 

69 
percent. Under-inflated tires increase rolling resistance and reduce fuel economy. They 
also wear more rapidly. 
 
BE KIND TO YOUR VEHICLE - Maintain proper engine tune-up to keep vehicles 
running efficiently. Keep the wheels aligned. Wheels that are fighting each other waste 
fuel. Replace air filters as recommended. Always consult the Owner's Manual for proper 
maintenance. 
 
TRAVEL LIGHT - Unnecessary weight, such as unneeded items in the trunk and a lot 
of luggage on the roof rack, makes the engine work harder and consumes more fuel. 
 
MINIMIZE USE OF HEAT AND AIR CONDITIONING - Use heating and air 
conditioning selectively to reduce the load on the engine. Decreasing your usage of the 
air conditioner when temperatures are above 80 degrees can help you save 10-15 percent 
of fuel. Use the vent setting as much as possible. Park in the shade to keep the car cool 
and reduce the need for air conditioning. 
 
CLOSE WINDOWS AT HIGH SPEEDS - Don't drive with the windows open unless 
your keep your speed under 50 mph. Driving with the windows open at highway speeds 
increases aerodynamic drag on the vehicle and lowers fuel economy. 
 
CONSOLIDATE TRIPS - Plan ahead to consolidate your trips, saving many miles of 
traveling. Planning ahead will also enable you to bypass congested routes, leading to less 
idling. 
 
CAR POOL - Share your ride to work, shopping and recreation. It not only saves 
gasoline, it can be more fun than riding alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
Chapter 10 – Commercial License 
 
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE 
A Commercial Driver’s License is required for operators of vehicles rated in excess 
of 26,000 pounds or transporting 16 or more passengers (including the driver) or 
hazardous materials. There are three classes of Commercial Driver’s License: 
 
Class A - Any combination of vehicles with GCWR of 26,001 pounds or more, 
providing the towed unit has GVWR of 10,001 pounds or more. 
 
Class B - Single vehicles with GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more, providing any 
towed vehicle has GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. 
 
Class C - Single vehicles with GVWR of 26,000 pounds or less, transporting 
placarded hazardous materials or designed to carry 16 or more passengers 
including the driver. These vehicles may tow a vehicle with GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less. 
 
Commercial Driver Instructional (Learner’s) Permit - allows a person to 
receive commercial driving instruction and behind the wheel driving 
experience on public highways. 
 
In accordance with state and federal law, any person holding a Commercial License 
from another state must transfer their Commercial Driver’s License within 30 days of 
establishing residency in Vermont. 
For further information about Commercial Driver’s Licenses and instructional 
permits call 802.828.2000. 
To schedule a written examination visit mydmv.vermont.gov. To schedule a CDL 
skill test, you must first submit a scheduling fee to: CDL Unit, Department of Motor 
Vehicles, 120 State St., Montpelier, VT 05603-0001. Once the fee is received, you may 
schedule the skill test. 
Vermont Commercial Driver’s License Manuals are available at all Department of 
Motor Vehicle Offices. 
 
 
 
 

71 
Chapter 11 - Persons with Disabilities 
 
The Department of Motor Vehicles knows how important it is for you to drive. A 
person who has a disability may still be able to get a license. The vehicle may need some 
special equipment to drive it safely. If a person who has a disability needs special 
equipment, it must fit and work properly. 
When you take your test, be truthful in explaining your disability to the examiner. If 
you need help getting into the building where you take the test, tell the scheduler when 
you call to make your appointment. 
If you have a medical problem such as epilepsy, diabetes (requiring insulin injection), 
or any other condition which may result in a loss of consciousness or have loss of a limb 
or are in a wheel chair, you must notify the Department of Motor Vehicles, Driver 
Improvement Section at 802.828.2000 prior to making an appointment for an 
examination. You will be sent a medical evaluation form that must be completed by your 
doctor. When the doctor has completed the form, mail it back to the Department of Motor 
Vehicles for review. You will be notified in writing if approval is granted or not granted 
for you to be issued a Learner’s Permit.  If you are not sure if a medical condition that 
you have will affect your ability to obtain a Learner’s Permit, please call the Department 
of Motor Vehicles, Driver Improvement Section at 802.828.2000 for advice. 
 
Parking for Disabled Drivers 
A person who has trouble walking may park without a fee, for 10 days, in a parking 
place where other drivers can only park a set time. (Such persons cannot park in places 
where parking or stopping vehicles is not allowed. They may not park in places saved for 
certain vehicles, or anywhere that parking is banned.) In order to do this, the person must 
have a special registration plate or placard which is issued by the Vermont Department 
of Motor Vehicles, or a special registration plate or other device which has been issued 
by another state for the purpose of parking for the disabled. A disabled person can get a 
set of Disabled Registration Plates for each vehicle registered in that person's name. 
There is no extra fee for these plates if the vehicle is already registered in Vermont. If a 
disabled person does not own a vehicle or does not want the Disabled Registration Plates, 
that person may get a Disabled Parking Placard. The Disabled Parking Placard is also 
available to blind passengers. 
A person, who is disabled or an organization that furnishes their Federal ID Number, 
may apply for a Disabled Parking Placard. There is no fee for the placard. The form can 
be obtained from the Department of Motor Vehicles, State Police offices, or Town Clerk's 
offices. You will have to fill out some of the form and your doctor will have to fill out 
another part of the form. 
The Disabled Plates/Placard of a disabled person may be revoked if the disabled 
person allows individuals not disabled to abuse the privileges of their Disabled Parking 
Plates/Placard. 
A person who parks in a disabled parking spot illegally may be subject to a fine and 
towing charges. 
In reference to 9 V.S.A. §4110, a motor vehicle operator who has been issued a 
Disabled Plate or Parking Placard under the laws of the State of Vermont or of any other 
state shall receive full service by every gasoline station displaying the international 

72 
symbol of disability access and, at full-service gasoline stations offering self-service 
pumping at a lesser cost, shall receive the lesser rate. 
Self-service gasoline stations, when requested by a motor vehicle operator who holds 
a Disabled Plate or Parking Placard, shall require an attendant to dispense gasoline at the 
self-service cost. 
 
Purchase and Use Tax for Disabled Drivers 
One vehicle owned or leased by a disabled person or their parent or guardian that has 
special equipment on it when registered by that person may not be subject to the purchase 
and use tax. If you meet the following criteria, you may be eligible for exemption from 
paying the purchase and use tax: 
 
1. You must have a disability which has left you permanently disabled. 
2. The vehicle controls must be altered so that it enables you to operate the vehicle, or 
must have a mechanical lifting device to allow entry and exit from the vehicle. 
3. Your Driver’s License must be restricted to operation with altered controls, if you 
are claiming exemption due to the installation of altered controls. 
4. You and any titled owners/registrants may have only one active registration 
involving a purchase and use tax exemption at a time.  
5. Form VT-014 signed by a physician. 

73 
Chapter 12 – Parents or Guardians 
 
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death and injury for teenagers. As a parent 
or guardian, you have a critical role in influencing your child’s safe driving habits. 
 
1. Assure your teen has plenty of chances to practice supervised driving, even more 
than the required 40 hours.  
 
2. Set a good example as a safe, responsible, and law abiding driver. 
 
3. Set and discuss family rules for maintaining driving privileges based on known risk 
factors for teen drivers. Such rules could address: 
 
 Lack of safety belt use 
 Speeding 
 Nighttime driving (after 9pm) 
 Using a cell phone or other 
distractions 
 Multiple teen passengers 
 Drowsy driving 
 Impaired driving 
 
4. Help your teen understand the risks associated with riding with another teen driver, 
particularly those who choose to drive dangerously and/or violate the laws. 
 
5. Communicate with your child and other parents to help everyone, both drivers and 
passengers, to follow the Junior Driver’s License restrictions. This will help all teens 
stay safe and within the GDL law. 
 
6. Encourage your teen to speak up for safety when riding with other drivers. 
 
7. Choose a safe, reliable, well-maintained vehicle for your teen driver. 
 
(Visit www.iihs.org/ratings for crash ratings of vehicles and other information about 
choosing safe vehicles for teens) 
 
NOTE: Both the Learner’s Permit and the Junior Driver’s License are “provisional” and 
can be recalled.  
• 
As a parent or guardian, you may suspend your child’s provisional license by writing 
to the Commissioner of the Department of Motor Vehicles 
• 
A recommendation from a Diversion/Reparative Board may result in a 30 day recall 
 
Excerpted from - A PARENT GUIDE TO THE GRADUATED DRIVER’S 
LICENSE (GDL)  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Alcohol, 7, 52, 53 
Animals, 19 
Anti-Lock, 48, 49 
Bicycles, 40, 52 
Cell Phone, 47, 56, 73 
Child Seat, 62 
Commercial Driver License, 12, 17, 70 
Current Address, 8, 10 
Date Of Birth, 8 
Distracted, 54, 55 
Driver Education, 12, 13, 14, 15 
Driver’s Privilege Card, 11, 12 
Drugs, 52, 53, 58, 68 
Emergency Vehicle, 31, 51 
Emissions Control System, 61 
Enhanced Driver's License, 9, 12 
Foreign Nationals, 9 
Four Seconds, 27, 28, 46 
Gender, 11 
Hand Signals, 26, 41 
Headlights, 19, 25, 42, 45, 46, 49, 51, 
60 
Highway Markings, 34 
Identity, 4, 8, 9 
Implied Consent, 53 
Interstate, 28, 31, 38, 40, 50, 51, 59 
Junior Driver’s License, 7, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 20, 21, 23, 73 
Learner’s Permit, 2, 3, 7, 12, 13, 15, 
16, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 71, 73 
Left Turns, 26 
Motorcycle, 16, 17, 23, 42, 43, 66 
Move Over Law, 31 
Nighttime Driving, 13, 20, 73 
On Board Diagnostic, 61 
Parallel Parking, 29 
Parents, 21, 62, 73 
Police Vehicle, 31 
Proof Of Identity, 16 
Provisional, 15, 21, 73 
Railroad Crossing, 29, 32, 37, 59 
Residency Requirements, 10 
Right Of Way, 28, 31, 32, 64 
Right Turns, 31 
Skidding, 48 
Slow Moving Vehicle, 44 
Social Security Information, 8, 9 
Speed Limits, 34, 38 
Stopping, 25, 42, 56 
Teen Passengers, 73 
Testing, 14 
Trains, 33 
Turn Signal, 26 
U.S. Military, 10 
US Citizenship, 9 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
State of Vermont 
Agency of Transportation 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
120 State Street 
Montpelier, Vermont 05603-0001 
dmv.vermont.gov 
To: 
