Oregon
Driver Manual
2026 - 2027
D R I V E R  A N D  M O T O R  V E H I C L E  S E R V I C E S

ii 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
ID requirements 
for f lying as of 
May 2025
•  If you are 18+, you need 
a federally accepted 
form of identiﬁcation to 
board a commercial 
U.S. f light.
•  A standard issue, non-
REAL ID Oregon driver’s 
license, instruction 
permit or identiﬁcation 
card is no longer 
accepted.
Additional acceptable 
IDs include, but are not 
limited to:
•  U.S. Passport or passport 
card.
•  Foreign government-
issued passport.
•  U.S. military ID.
•  Permanent Resident 
card.
•  Federally recognized 
tribal photo ID.
Learn about your options at
Oregon.gov/REALID

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
iii
2026 – 2027  
Oregon Driver 
Manual
Visit us at OregonDMV.com
Published by:
Oregon Department of Transporta琀椀on 
Driver and Motor Vehicle Services 
1905 Lana Avenue NE 
Salem, Oregon 97314
Front cover photo: ODOT Crea琀椀ve Services

iv 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
The purpose of the Oregon Driver Manual is to help drivers 
prepare for Oregon licensing tests by providing a summary of 
rules of the road and safe driving prac琀椀ces.
This manual condenses and paraphrases selected language 
in the Oregon Revised Statutes. It also provides safety 
recommenda琀椀ons not included in law. This manual is not a 
source of law and should not be relied upon or cited as legal 
precedent in a court of law or other administra琀椀ve or legal 
proceeding. Local governments may have addi琀椀onal ordinances 
not covered in this manual.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
v
Table of Contents
Tes琀椀ng
Vision Test ..................................................................................1
Knowledge Tests .......................................................................2
Drive Test ....................................................................................3
Study for Your Tests
Signs & Tra昀케c Signals .....................................................................7
Signs .............................................................................................7
Tra昀케c Signals ...........................................................................15
Lane Travel.......................................................................................18
Speed Regula琀椀ons ..................................................................19
Pavement Markings ................................................................22
Maintaining a Space Cushion ...............................................26
Curves........................................................................................30
Changing Lanes .......................................................................30
Passing .......................................................................................31
No Passing ................................................................................32
Freeway Driving ......................................................................34
Driving a Large Vehicle or Towing .......................................35
Turns & Intersec琀椀ons ....................................................................38
Turn Signals ..............................................................................38
Turns ..........................................................................................39
Intersec琀椀ons ............................................................................42
Roundabouts ............................................................................43
Sharing the Road ............................................................................46
Pedestrians ...............................................................................46
School Zones ............................................................................49
Bicycles .....................................................................................50
Motorcycles and Mopeds .....................................................52
Large Vehicles ..........................................................................53
School, Places of Worship or Worker and  
Public Transit Buses ................................................................55
Other Vehicles .........................................................................56
Approaching Stopped Vehicles ............................................57

vi 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Please check DMV’s website OregonDMV.com for updates, o昀케ce loca琀椀ons and hours, fees, 
and addi琀椀onal informa琀椀on.
Emergency Vehicles ................................................................58
Police Stops ..............................................................................58
Work Zones ..............................................................................59
Railroad Crossings, Light Rail & Street Cars .............................63
Parking & Stopping ........................................................................68
Safe & Responsible Driving .........................................................73
Defensive Driving ...................................................................73
Safety Belts ..............................................................................73
Communica琀椀ng With Other Drivers ..................................74
Avoiding a Collision ................................................................74
Hazardous Condi琀椀ons ...........................................................76
Dangerous Driving Behaviors ..............................................80
Vehicle Equipment Failures ...................................................84
Fuel Saving Techniques ..........................................................86
Other Important Informa琀椀on
How to Apply ...........................................................................89
Addi琀椀onal Services .................................................................92
Mandatory Insurance .............................................................93
Tra昀케c Collisions ......................................................................93
Loss of Driving Privileges ......................................................95
Contact DMV .............................................. Inside Back Cover
Table of Contents continued

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
vii
Important message to drivers
The Oregon Driver Manual will help 
you learn the rules of the road and 
understand safe driving prac琀椀ces. 
New drivers are much more at risk 
because of their lack of experience 
behind the wheel. If you are learning 
to drive, one of the best ways to 
improve your safety is to get useful 
instruc琀椀on and plenty of prac琀椀ce. 
This manual provides informa琀椀on 
about rules of the road that you will 
need to pass the knowledge test. If you 
already have an Oregon driver license, review 
this manual for new laws and safe driving prac琀椀ces. 
Whether traveling by car, transit, bicycle, scooter or on foot, 
we all want to reach our des琀椀na琀椀on safely. It is important to 
remember that driving is a privilege, and we all play a role in 
ensuring that everyone remains safe on our roadways. Each 
one of us has a responsibility every 琀椀me we get behind the 
wheel of a vehicle to choose to be a琀琀en琀椀ve, obey tra昀케c laws, 
and share the road with other drivers, people riding bicycles 
and those who walk and roll.
Unfortunately, every day, too many drivers choose to drive 
distracted or in a careless way, risking the lives of themselves, 
their passengers, and other people sharing the road. Driving 
impaired - a昀琀er drinking alcohol, using cannabis, or any other 
substance that alters your mind, or focusing on a phone 
or other electronic device instead of the road, or driving 
aggressively, puts everyone at risk. At best, you may lose your 
license. At worst, you may lose your life or cause someone 
else’s death, including that of a loved one. 
We need to look out for each other, share the road, and ensure 
that everyone reaches their des琀椀na琀椀on safely!
Amy Joyce - DMV Administrator

viii 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual1
Tes琀椀ng
To operate a motor vehicle on highways or 
premises open to the public in Oregon, you must 
possess a valid driving privilege. This manual 
only addresses requirements for obtaining a 
Class C non-commercial driving privilege.
For current information on requirements, fees, 
drive test scheduling and ofﬁce hours, go to 
OregonDMV.com.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
1
For an original driving privilege, DMV will test your vision, 
driving knowledge and driving skill.
Every 琀椀me you take a test, you must 昀椀rst pay the test fee and 
present proof of iden琀椀ty, date of birth, and current residence 
address. You may take tests at most DMV O昀케ces.
You must pay your test fee separate from any other fees.
Vision Test
DMV will test your eyesight to con昀椀rm you can see well 
enough to drive safely. If you take the test while wearing 
glasses or contact lenses, your driving privilege will indicate 
that correc琀椀ve lenses are required. There is no fee for taking 
the vision test.
If you do not pass the vision test, DMV will give you a form to 
take to a licensed vision specialist.

2 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Knowledge Tests
Class C Knowledge Test
This manual includes all the informa琀椀on necessary to pass this 
test. The test includes ques琀椀ons about road signs, tra昀케c laws, 
and other informa琀椀on a driver needs to know. It has 35 mul琀椀ple-
choice ques琀椀ons. You must answer 28 ques琀椀ons correctly to 
receive a passing score. For current fees go to  
www.oregon.gov/odot/DMV/Pages/Fees/Driver.aspx 
You have op琀椀ons to take the knowledge test! Online: Go to 
DMV2U.Oregon.gov, at any 琀椀me; or at a DMV o昀케ce, either 
standby service or with an appointment.
Guidelines for Taking a Knowledge 
Test in a DMV O昀케ce
• Only those being tested and authorized translators are 
allowed in the tes琀椀ng area.
• Knowledge tests are given on a touch-screen monitor. The 
test is available in several languages, with or without audio 
assistance. You may bring your own earbuds or headphones 
for the test.
• You cannot use a DMV manual, electronic devices or any 
notes to help you answer test ques琀椀ons. With permission, 
you may use a paper foreign language transla琀椀on dic琀椀onary.
• If it is determined that you are chea琀椀ng, you will fail your 
test. You will not be allowed to test again for 90 days. The 
following is considered chea琀椀ng: talking, wri琀椀ng or note 
taking, cell phone use, opera琀椀on of any electronic devices, or 
allowing someone else to take a test for you.
• If you fail a knowledge test, you may test again the same day, 
depending on the DMV o昀케ce tes琀椀ng resource availability.
• If you require a special accommoda琀椀on to take a knowledge 
test, please contact your local o昀케ce.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
3
Guidelines for Taking a Knowledge Test Online
• You must use a desktop or laptop computer with a keyboard, 
mouse and webcam. 
 » You cannot use a touchscreen device like mobile phones 
or tablets. 
 »
Using the webcam, a clear photo of you will be taken at 
the start of the test. Random photos of you will be taken 
during the test to con昀椀rm your iden琀椀ty.
• If under 18 years of age, a Proctor over 21 years of age must 
supervise the test.
 » A Proctor can only supervise two tests in a 24-hour period.
• You cannot use a DMV manual, other electronic devices or 
any notes to help you answer test ques琀椀ons.
• The test is available in several languages, with or without 
audio help. 
• If you fail a knowledge test, you may test two 琀椀mes in a 
24-hour period. You may take the test online four 琀椀mes total. 
A昀琀er four a琀琀empts you must test at a DMV o昀케ce.
Drive Test
During the drive (behind-the-wheel) test, you will demonstrate 
your driving skills and knowledge of tra昀케c rules, highway signs, 
and signals. The test includes turning, backing up, parking, lane 
changes, speed control, signaling, vehicle control, and general 
driving ability. The examiner will sit in the front seat and give 
you direc琀椀ons. A昀琀er the test, the examiner will discuss the 
results with you.
DMV may waive the drive test if:
• You are a new resident surrendering an out-of-state license 
that is valid or expired less than one year. 
• DMV receives proof you completed an ODOT-Approved Driver 
Educa琀椀on Course within the past two years.

4 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Drive tests are conducted by appointment only. DMV requires 
you to bring a passenger vehicle with current registra琀椀on 
and valid proof of insurance. You must show valid proof of 
insurance for your vehicle before the drive test or you will have 
to reschedule the test. For current fees go to 
www.oregon.gov/odot/DMV/Pages/Fees/Driver.aspx
Rules and Guidelines for Drive Tests
• Only you and the examiner are allowed in the vehicle during 
a drive test. Translators, family, friends, or pets are not 
allowed.
• Remove weapons from your vehicle before taking a drive test.
• Turn o昀昀 any electronic devices in your vehicle, including the 
radio and your cell phone.
• Remove objects from the dashboard and rearview mirror.
• If you fail the drive test, you must wait un琀椀l the next 
business day before retaking the test.
Test Vehicle
The examiner will determine if the vehicle being used has the 
equipment required for the test. If your vehicle does not pass 
the equipment check, you will have to reschedule the drive test. 
Vehicle equipment that must be in working order for the test 
includes:
• The vehicle starts under its own power.
• Turn signals (front and back)
• Brake lights
• Horn
• Passenger door opens and closes with handle from inside 
and outside.
• Proper, secure and reasonably clean passenger seat.
• Seatbelts
• Tires are not bald or damaged
• Mu昀툀er has no excessive leaks or unreasonable noise.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
5
• Display valid registra琀椀on.
• Side view or rearview mirrors
• Nothing may obstruct the driver’s or examiner’s view to the 
front, side or rear of the vehicle.
If weather condi琀椀ons require, your vehicle must have trac琀椀on 
琀椀res or chains, windshield wipers, headlights, taillights and a 
window defroster.
Test Appointments 
If you need to take a drive test, you may go to 
DMV2U.Oregon.gov to schedule an appointment or call 
503-945-5000. It’s a good idea to schedule a minimum of three 
weeks in advance of the date you want to take your test. 
You may also take a drive test through a cer琀椀昀椀ed Third Party 
drive tester. Third Party Testers can o昀琀en schedule tests 
more quickly and at 琀椀mes or on days not available at DMV. 
Tes琀椀ng costs may be greater when using a Third Party Tester, 
however. Please visit Oregon.gov/ODOT/DMV/Pages/driverid/
classctes琀椀ngbusiness.aspx for more informa琀椀on. 
You must have held a permit for at least 6 months if you are 
under 18 years of age and applying for a driver license.

6 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual2
Study for Your Tests
Everything you need to know to pass your tests 
is located in this section. It is important that 
you study the material for each topic. Sample 
questions are provided to help you test your 
knowledge.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
7
Signs & Trafﬁc Signals
You must obey all o昀케cial signs, signals, and markings unless you 
see a police o昀케cer or road worker redirec琀椀ng tra昀케c.
Signs
Signs o昀琀en use symbols or pictures rather than words. Each 
type of sign has a special color and shape to help you easily 
recognize the sign at a glance.
Regulatory Signs—Prohibi琀椀ve
Tra昀케c signs that prohibit certain ac琀椀ons or movements are red 
in color and increase safety by controlling the 昀氀ow of tra昀케c 
through intersec琀椀ons.
Stop – Octagon: This sign means you must 
come to a complete stop. Yield to other vehicles 
and stop and stay stopped for pedestrians 
crossing in marked or unmarked crosswalks. 
When it is safe, you may enter the intersec琀椀on.
Yield – Triangle: This sign means you should 
reduce speed and yield right of way. If needed, 
stop the same as you would for a stop sign.
Do Not Enter – Square: This sign warns you not 
to enter a road or freeway. You will see this sign 
if you are going the wrong way.
No Le昀琀 Turn; No Right Turn; No U Turn: These signs prohibit 
certain ac琀椀ons. 
When you see a sign with 
a red circle and a slash 
mark, it means do not 
make the turn shown.

8 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Regulatory Signs – Other
Regulatory signs are rectangular with black words or symbols 
on a white background and tell you what to do. They are 
posted at or near where the requirement applies. Not all 
regulatory signs are shown here.
Speed Limit: This indicates the maximum 
speed in miles per hour. Signs may be 
electronic and may change based on current 
condi琀椀ons.
One Way: Tra昀케c 昀氀ows only in the 
direc琀椀on of the arrow.
Right Turn Permi琀琀ed Without 
Stopping: This sign may appear below a 
stop sign. Tra昀케c turning right may turn 
without stopping. Other tra昀케c must 
stop and yield right of way.
Lane-Use Control: These signs are 
used where turns are required or 
permi琀琀ed from lanes as shown.
Right Lane Transit Only: These signs are 
used in Transit Only lanes. Only transit 
vehicles (or people biking, if indicated on  
the sign) may con琀椀nue straight through an 
intersec琀椀on. 
Right Turns Permi琀琀ed: This sign indicates you can  
brie昀氀y use the transit lane to turn into a driveway, turn 
at the next intersec琀椀on, or pull over to park along the 
curb where allowed. Always yield to transit vehicles 
and people riding bicycles in transit lanes. Merge into the lane 
behind them a昀琀er they pass.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
9
Keep Right: A tra昀케c island, median or obstruc琀椀on 
divides the road ahead. Keep to the right.
Center Lane Turn Only: Share the center lane for le昀琀 
turns from both direc琀椀ons.
Do Not Pass: This sign indicates that you may not 
pass.
No Turn on Red: You may not turn during the red 
light. You must wait for the signal to turn green.
High Occupancy Vehicle: This lane is reserved for 
vehicles carrying at least two or more persons, as 
noted on the sign. A white diamond may be painted 
on the lane.
Le昀琀 Turn Yield on Green: On a green circular signal, 
yield the right-of-way to oncoming tra昀케c and 
pedestrians un琀椀l it is safe to turn.
Stop Here for Pedestrians: This sign may appear 
near a crosswalk. Stop at the stop line when a 
pedestrian is in the crosswalk.
HOV  2+
ONLY
6AM    -    9AM
MON  -  FRI
L E F T
L A N E

10 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Warning Signs
Warning signs are yellow and alert you to known possible 
hazards or a change in road condi琀椀ons ahead. As a driver, you 
are ul琀椀mately responsible for recognizing and reac琀椀ng correctly 
to changing condi琀椀ons, signed or not. Not all warning signs are 
shown here.
Pedestrian Crossing: Be alert for people crossing 
your path. These signs may include a 昀氀ashing yellow 
beacon that indicates a pedestrian is crossing, has 
recently crossed or is about to cross.
Mul琀椀use Path Crossing: People riding bicycles and 
pedestrians regularly cross the road in the area.
In-Street Pedestrian Crossing: This sign may appear 
at a crosswalk. Stop when a pedestrian is in the 
crosswalk.
Curve: There is a curve ahead. 
Sharp Turn: There is a sharp turn in the road ahead.
Chevron: A sharp curve or change in the direc琀椀on of 
the road is at the sign. 

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
11
Winding Road: The road contains a series of turns or 
curves.
Reversing Curves: The road ahead curves to the 
right, then le昀琀.
Crossroad: A four-way intersec琀椀on is ahead. Cross-
tra昀케c may enter the road.
Side Road: A “T” intersec琀椀on is ahead. 
Tra昀케c may enter the road from the le昀琀 or 
right. 
Merge: Tra昀케c is merging from the side 
shown.  
Add Lane: Two roadways join together. You do not 
need to merge.
Lane Reduc琀椀on: The indicated lane ends soon. 
Vehicles in that lane must merge into the through 
lane.
Two-Way Tra昀케c Ahead: The one-way road joins a 
two-way road ahead. You will be facing oncoming 
tra昀케c.
Divided Highway Begins or Ends: These signs 
indicate the beginning or end of a divided highway. 
Keep to the right. 
Stop Ahead: There is a stop sign ahead. Slow down 
and prepare to stop.

12 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Signal Ahead: A tra昀케c signal is ahead. Slow down  
and be ready to stop.
Reduced Speed Limit Ahead: A reduced speed limit 
is ahead. Prepare to slow down.
Roundabout Ahead: There is a roundabout 
intersec琀椀on ahead.
Railroad Advance: A railroad crossing is ahead. You 
may have to stop.
Low Clearance: The overpass ahead has low 
clearance. Do not proceed if your vehicle is too tall 
to pass under it.
Hill: A steep grade is ahead.
Advisory Speed: Advises the safe speed for 
freeway ramps and curves. This sign may be 
used with other signs.
Signs may be electronic and may change 
based on current condi琀椀ons. 
Slippery When Wet: The pavement is unusually slick 
when wet.
Deer: Deer o昀琀en cross the road in this area. Be alert. 
Slow down if you see deer or other wildlife.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
13
Route, Guide, and Informa琀椀on Signs
Route signs show you 
which route you are 
on and if the road is an 
interstate, U.S. route, or 
state highway.
Interstate 
Route
U.S. Route
State 
Highway
Guide or informa琀椀on signs are green.  
They give exit informa琀椀on or show the 
direc琀椀on of roads or ci琀椀es.
The number on an exit 
sign helps you know 
which exit to take.
Safety Corridors: Safety 
corridors are designated 
stretches of highway with 
more fatal and serious injury 
collisions than the statewide 
average. Turn on your lights for safety. Signs iden琀椀fying safety 
corridors may include diamond shaped 昀氀ags.
Historic, Cultural, and Recrea琀椀onal Signs: These brown signs 
point to historic and cultural loca琀椀ons. They also point to 
scenic areas, picnic grounds, and parks.
SAFETY   CORRIDOR
NEXT  7  MILES

14 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Motorist Service Signs: These blue signs tell you about services 
or facili琀椀es along the highway. These signs may indicate gas, 
food, and lodging are available at the next exit, a rest area is 
ahead, an electric vehicle charging sta琀椀on is available or a 
facility or parking area is accessible to a person with a disability. 
They can also indicate the road to a hospital.
Alert your family first!
Register your emergency contacts 
now so that Oregon law enforcement 
can reach your loved ones quickly.
Available at DMV2U.Oregon.gov

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
15
Trafﬁc Signals
Tra昀케c signals control the right of way and provide for 
a smooth, orderly 昀氀ow of tra昀케c. If a signal appears 
dark, such as during a power failure, you should stop 
as if there are stop signs in all direc琀椀ons. When a 
tra昀케c signal is out of order and 昀氀ashes yellow or red, 
you must obey that signal as de昀椀ned below.
Steady Circular Red: A steady red signal means stop and 
remain stopped un琀椀l the signal changes.
You are allowed to make the following turns on red a昀琀er 
coming to a complete stop unless a sign or police o昀케cer 
states otherwise.
• When entering a two-way road, you may turn right.
• When entering a one-way road, you may turn right or 
le昀琀 in the direc琀椀on of the one-way road.
Flashing Red or Dark Signal: A 昀氀ashing red or a dark 
signal is treated the same as a stop sign.
Red Arrow: A steady red arrow means stop and remain 
stopped un琀椀l the signal changes, except for allowed 
turns on red. The same turns allowed for a steady red 
signal are allowed for a red arrow.
Steady Circular Yellow: A steady yellow signal warns you 
that the signal is about to turn red. Stop before entering 
the intersec琀椀on. If you cannot stop safely, drive carefully 
through it.

16 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Flashing Yellow: A 昀氀ashing yellow signal means slow 
down and proceed with cau琀椀on.
Yellow Arrow: A steady yellow arrow warns you that 
the signal is about to turn red. Stop before entering the 
intersec琀椀on, or if you cannot stop safely, drive carefully 
through it.
Flashing Yellow Arrow: A 昀氀ashing yellow arrow means 
that you may make the movement indicated by the 
arrow, but 昀椀rst you must yield to pedestrians and 
oncoming tra昀케c. Oncoming tra昀케c has a steady green 
signal.
Steady Circular Green: A green signal means all 
movements—straight ahead, le昀琀 or right turns—are 
permi琀琀ed, unless prohibited by a sign. Le昀琀 turns must 
昀椀rst yield to pedestrians and oncoming tra昀케c. Right 
turns must 昀椀rst yield to pedestrians.
Green Arrow: A steady green arrow means you have the 
right of way and may make the movement indicated by 
the arrow.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
17
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. What does this sign mean?
a. Curves ahead.
b. Slippery when wet.
c. Obstacle in the road. 
(page 12)
2. Regulatory Prohibi琀椀ve signs are red and white. Which one of 
these signs is a regulatory prohibi琀椀ve sign?
a. Do Not Enter.
b. Railroad Advance.
c. Hospital Ahead.  
(page 7)
3. If a tra昀케c signal is dark because of a power outage, you 
should
a. wait for a police o昀케cer to direct tra昀케c.
b. treat it like a yield sign.
c. treat it like there are stop signs in all direc琀椀ons. 
(page 15)

18 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Lane Travel
Drive on the right side of the road except when:
• Passing another vehicle going in the same direc琀椀on as you.
• Driving to the le昀琀 of center to pass an obstruc琀椀on.
• A road is marked for one-way tra昀케c.
• A road has three marked lanes and the center lane is a 
passing lane.
• Directed by emergency personnel or other persons direc琀椀ng 
tra昀케c.
When a road has no center line and tra昀케c moves in opposite 
direc琀椀ons, drivers must give at least half the road to oncoming 
tra昀케c.
If you must drive to the le昀琀 of the center line to go around 
a road hazard or for any other reason, you must yield to 
oncoming tra昀케c.
There will be 琀椀mes when you need to yield so another vehicle 
can proceed. Yielding means you must slow down or stop to 
allow another vehicle or pedestrian to con琀椀nue safely.
Stop before you enter or cross a road from an alley, driveway 
or parking lot not controlled by signs or signals. Yield to 
approaching vehicles and pedestrians.
Change lanes only when you can do so safely. Avoid frequent 
lane changes.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
19
Speed Regulations
Speed Limits
In addi琀椀on to the basic rule, Oregon has maximum speed limits. 
A speed limit is the maximum speed considered safe for the 
area under ideal driving condi琀椀ons.
The following speed limits are set in law for the speci昀椀ed areas, 
whether posted or not. They apply unless a di昀昀erent speed is 
posted.
15 Miles Per Hour
• When driving in alleys.
• Narrow residen琀椀al areas.
20 Miles Per Hour
• In any business district.
• Within a school speed zone.
25 Miles Per Hour
• In residen琀椀al districts.
• In public parks.
• On ocean shores, if vehicles are permi琀琀ed.
55 Miles Per Hour
• On all roads and highways not mee琀椀ng any other 
de昀椀ni琀椀on unless otherwise posted.
Interstate Speed Limits
• Speed limits will vary on interstate highways.

20 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Variable Speed Signs
Digital speed signs have replaced some standard speed signs in 
Oregon. The digital signs use road, weather, tra昀케c and visibility 
sensors to lower the speed limit when condi琀椀ons require 
drivers to slow down. The digital displays may also show the 
reason for a reduced speed. There are two types of digital 
variable speed signs.
• Variable Advisory Speed: Variable advisory speed signs are 
yellow and say, “advisory speed.” These signs recommend 
a speed based on driving condi琀椀ons like heavy tra昀케c, poor 
weather or a slippery road (such as heavy rain, fog, ice or 
snow). These signs are turned on and o昀昀 as needed. These 
are not speed limits, but police may enforce them through 
the basic rule law.
• Variable Speed Limit: Variable speed limit signs are black 
and white and say, “speed limit.” These signs change the 
speed limit based on driving condi琀椀ons like heavy tra昀케c, 
poor weather or a slippery road (such as heavy rain, fog, 
ice or snow). Police may enforce these signs like any other 
speed limit sign.
Variable speed signs, based on speci昀椀c condi琀椀ons, work to 
improve safety and reduce the chance of a collision by:
• Improving Line of Sight: In poor weather condi琀椀ons, such as 
fog, heavy rain, or snow, slower speeds give drivers more 琀椀me 
to react to obstacles or hazards that may be di昀케cult to see.
• Providing More Time to Stop: In areas such as sharp curves, 
steep hills, or construc琀椀on zones, slower speeds allow drivers 
more 琀椀me to stop or maneuver their vehicles safely. It also 
helps avoid collisions by providing a larger space cushion.
The Basic Rule Law 
The basic rule states you must drive at a speed that is 
reasonable and cau琀椀ous for exis琀椀ng condi琀椀ons. The basic rule 
applies on all roads at all 琀椀mes. 
SPEED
LIMIT
45
LOW
VISIBILITY

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
21
To obey the basic rule, think about your speed in rela琀椀on to 
other tra昀케c, pedestrians, people riding bicycles, the surface 
and width of the road, hazards at intersec琀椀ons, weather, 
visibility, and any other condi琀椀ons that a昀昀ect safety. The basic 
rule does not allow you to drive over the speed limit. 
If you drive at a speed that is unsafe for exis琀椀ng condi琀椀ons in 
any area, at any 琀椀me, even if it is slower than the speed limit, 
you are viola琀椀ng the basic rule.
Slow Drivers
If you drive slower than the normal speed of tra昀케c, you must use 
the right lane or drive as closely as possible to the right curb or 
edge of the road, unless you are preparing to make a le昀琀 turn.
Watch for conges琀椀on behind you if you drive slower than the 
designated speed. Pull o昀昀 the road at the 昀椀rst safe area and let 
the tra昀케c behind you pass.
Racing
It is illegal to race on any road. Racing can be any accelera琀椀on 
or speed contest or the making of a speed record.
Source: FHWA. Adapted from USDOT Pedestrian Safety Action Plan
Vehicle Speed and Pedestrian Fatali琀椀es
HIT BY A VEHICLE
TRAVELING AT:
10% Risk of Death
23MPH
HIT BY A VEHICLE
TRAVELING AT:
50% Risk of Death
42MPH
HIT BY A VEHICLE
TRAVELING AT:
90% Risk of Death
58MPH

22 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Pavement Markings
Oregon’s pavement markings follow the na琀椀onal standards. You 
must obey all pavement markings unless you see a police o昀케cer 
or road worker redirec琀椀ng tra昀케c.
Yellow Markings are used to separate tra昀케c moving in 
opposite direc琀椀ons (center line) and to mark the le昀琀 edge of 
one-way roads and ramps, two-way le昀琀 turn lanes, and painted 
medians.
Solid yellow line: Marks the le昀琀 
edge of one-way roads and ramps.
Broken yellow center line: 
Indicates a two-way road used for 
tra昀케c traveling in opposite 
direc琀椀ons. Passing is allowed for 
both direc琀椀ons of travel.
Double center line consis琀椀ng of a 
solid yellow line and broken yellow 
line: Indicates where passing is 
allowed. A broken yellow line on 
your side of the lane indicates 
you are allowed to pass. A solid 
yellow line on your side of the lane 
indicates you are not allowed to 
pass.
Double solid yellow line: Indicates 
passing is not allowed for both 
direc琀椀ons of tra昀케c. You may turn 
le昀琀, to enter or exit a roadway, 
across double solid yellow lines 
a昀琀er wai琀椀ng for oncoming tra昀케c 
to clear.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
23
Two-way special le昀琀 turn lane: If 
a two-way le昀琀 turn lane has been 
provided, do not make a le昀琀 turn 
from any other lane. It is illegal to 
travel in a two-way le昀琀 turn lane, 
so enter the lane just before you 
want to make the turn. Wait in the 
le昀琀 turn lane un琀椀l tra昀케c clears and 
you can complete the turn.
Painted median with double solid 
yellow lines on both sides: Marks 
the area between two direc琀椀ons 
of travel. You may make a le昀琀 
turn across a painted median a昀琀er 
wai琀椀ng for oncoming tra昀케c to 
clear. You may not use a painted 
median as a turn lane. It is illegal 
to travel in a median with double 
yellow lines.
Yellow diagonal stripes: Used 
within a painted median to inform 
you of 昀椀xed objects in the road 
ahead or areas where vehicle use is 
not allowed. It is illegal to drive in 
or make a turn across these stripes.
White Markings are used to separate lanes of tra昀케c 昀氀owing 
in the same direc琀椀on and mark the right edge of travel lanes. 
These are also used for crosswalks, stop lines, symbols, and 
words.
Solid white line: Used for an edge 
or fog line to help drivers to stay 
on the road.

24 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Wide solid white line: Used to 
direct tra昀케c into speci昀椀c lanes, 
such as turn lanes, and to separate 
bike lanes from other tra昀케c lanes. 
Crossing a wide solid white line is 
permi琀琀ed but discouraged.
Broken white line: Separates 
lanes of tra昀케c going in the same 
direc琀椀on. Crossing a broken white 
line is permi琀琀ed with cau琀椀on.
Do琀琀ed white line: Short do琀琀ed 
lines placed closer together than a 
broken line. Crossing a do琀琀ed line 
is permi琀琀ed with cau琀椀on.
When used prior to an exit ramp or 
intersec琀椀on, it informs you that the 
lane you are traveling in will not 
con琀椀nue on the same route, such 
as a right-turn only lane or an exit 
only lane on the freeway.
When used at a freeway entrance ramp, it informs you that you 
are entering the freeway and must merge into tra昀케c.
When used within an intersec琀椀on, it will help guide you 
through the intersec琀椀on into the proper lane.
Double solid white line: Usually 
accompanied by a sign prohibi琀椀ng 
lane changes for a certain distance. 
Means you are not allowed to 
change lanes. Stay in your lane.
Marked crosswalk: Noted by white 
lines in an area where pedestrians 
cross the road. Stop when a 
pedestrian is in the crosswalk.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
25
Stop line: A solid white line across 
your lane to show the point at 
which you are required to stop.
Bike lane: Iden琀椀昀椀ed by a wide 
white line with a bicycle symbol or 
a bike lane sign. Bike lanes may be 
painted green.
Yield line: A row of triangles in your 
lane, poin琀椀ng toward your vehicle 
to indicate the point at which you 
are required to yield.
White chevrons: May be used to 
inform you of 昀椀xed objects in the 
road ahead or other areas where 
vehicle use is not allowed.
Red markings are used to designate where transit only vehicles 
may travel con琀椀nuously – like buses, light rail trains (LRT) or 
bikes. Not all Transit Only lanes are red, so always look for signs 
or other markings on the road.
Solid red lane: Transit Only lane, not 
for cars. These may also say "BUS 
ONLY, BUS BIKE ONLY, or LRT". 
Striped red lines: Show where you 
may enter the Transit Only lane to 
turn, park or enter a driveway. 

26 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Maintaining a Space Cushion
When a driver makes an unexpected or quick movement, 
other drivers need 琀椀me to react. The only way you can be sure 
you have enough 琀椀me to react is by leaving plenty of space 
between your vehicle and the vehicles around you. That space 
becomes a “space cushion.” You should try to keep a cushion of 
space ahead, to each side and behind you.
Following Distance
The speed at which you drive determines how 
much 琀椀me you have to act or react and how 
long it takes to stop. The higher the speed you 
are traveling, the less 琀椀me you have to spot 
hazards, judge the speed of other tra昀케c, and 
react to condi琀椀ons.
Always maintain a safe following distance from 
the vehicle in front of you. You will have a be琀琀er 
view of the road to watch for problems and 
more 琀椀me to react.
A safe following distance is de昀椀ned as 2-4 seconds. For speeds 
greater than 30 mph, a safe following distance should be 
4 seconds or more to allow you 琀椀me to make a decision and 
take ac琀椀on.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
27
To determine if you are following too closely:
• Watch for when the rear of the vehicle ahead passes 
something like a sign or pole. Count the seconds it takes you 
to reach the same spot.
• You are following too closely if you pass the mark before you 
昀椀nish coun琀椀ng at least two seconds.
• If so, increase the space between you and the vehicle ahead 
and count again at another spot to check your new following 
distance. Repeat un琀椀l you are no closer than two seconds 
behind the other vehicle.
When stopping behind another vehicle, make sure you can see 
where the rear 琀椀res of the vehicle in front meet the road. A昀琀er 
tra昀케c starts to move, return to a safe following distance.
There are situa琀椀ons, such as those listed below, when you need 
even more space between your vehicle and the one in front 
of you. In all of these situa琀椀ons, you should increase your 
following distance:
• On wet or slippery roads. You need more distance to stop 
your vehicle.
• When the driver behind you wants to pass. Slow down to 
allow room in front of your vehicle for the passing vehicle to 
complete the pass.
• When following people riding bicycles or motorcycles. You 
need extra room in case the rider loses control or stops 
suddenly.
• When following drivers who cannot see you. The drivers 
of large vehicles may not be able to see you when you are 
directly behind them. These vehicles also block your view of 
the road ahead.
• When you have a heavy load or are pulling a trailer. The 
extra weight increases your stopping distance.
• When it is hard for you to see. In bad weather or darkness, 
increase your following distance to make up for decreased 
visibility.

28 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
• When stopped on a hill. The vehicle ahead may roll back 
when it starts to move.
• When you are learning to drive. The extra room provides 
you 琀椀me to make cri琀椀cal decisions as you learn.
• When approaching or in a work zone. Tra昀케c may slow or 
stop unexpectedly in these areas.
Side Space Cushion
A space cushion to the side will give you room to react defensively 
to sudden moves toward your lane by other vehicles. You should:
• Be cau琀椀ous when driving alongside other vehicles on mul琀椀-
lane streets. Someone may crowd your lane or try to change 
lanes and hit you. If possible, drop back a li琀琀le or move 
ahead of the other vehicle.
• Keep as much space as possible between your vehicle and 
oncoming vehicles. In general, it is safest to drive in the 
center of your lane so your vehicle can move le昀琀 or right to 
avoid a poten琀椀al problem.
• Make room for vehicles entering freeways. If there is no one 
next to you, move over a lane. Help other drivers signaling 
for a lane change make the move safely by slowing down or 
speeding up a li琀琀le, if needed.
• Keep extra space between your vehicle and parked cars by 
moving away from them without leaving your lane. A vehicle 
door may open in your path or someone may step out of a 
vehicle or from between parked vehicles.
Space Cushion Behind
You can help keep the driver behind you at a safe distance 
by keeping a steady speed and signaling in advance by gently 
pressing the brake when you have to slow down or stop. Your 
brake lights will alert drivers behind you that you are slowing 
down. If a vehicle behind you is following too closely and there 
is a right lane, move over to the right. If you can’t move over, 

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
29
slowly reduce your speed. This may encourage the vehicle to 
pass you or to stop tailga琀椀ng. Never brake hard to discourage 
tailga琀椀ng; you could get hit from behind.
Backing Up
A mistake that drivers make when backing up is failing to look 
both ways behind them. Mirrors do not give you a full view. To 
see as much as possible, turn your body and head to the right 
and look out through the rear window. Check for pedestrians 
and approaching tra昀케c by glancing to either side, then back up 
slowly.
Stopping Distances
You need to know how long it takes to stop any vehicle you 
drive. Stopping distance can depend on road and weather 
condi琀椀ons, the weight of your vehicle, your reac琀椀on 琀椀me, and 
the braking ability of your vehicle. The faster you drive, the 
greater your stopping distance even in ideal condi琀椀ons.
Stopping takes longer than you think. At 60 mph, the distance 
traveled from the point you recognize a hazard ahead and apply 
the brakes, to where your vehicle comes to a stop is greater 
than the length of a football 昀椀eld.
MPH
359 feet
268 feet
189 feet
123 feet
69 feet
Source: American Associa琀椀on of Motor Vehicle Administrators, 2014

30 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Looking Ahead
It is important for drivers to scan ahead for trouble spots as far 
as you can see to help you avoid the need for last-minute moves. 
Scanning means taking in the en琀椀re scene, including the sides 
of the road. Scanning the road ahead and to the sides helps you 
see pedestrians ahead, poten琀椀al hazards, vehicles that may enter 
your path, or signs rou琀椀ng you to another street or road.
Look for clues that a driver ahead may be going to slow down 
or stop, such as a person riding a bicycle or pedestrian on the 
road ahead, brake lights coming on, or blinking turn signals.
Curves
Slow down before you enter a curve. Use the speed shown 
below a curve sign as a guide, if posted. Look through the curve 
to where you want to go and then check the lane posi琀椀on of 
approaching vehicles. Stay to the right of the center line and 
in the middle of your lane. Be alert for people riding bicycles, 
pedestrians, or slow-moving vehicles hidden around the curve. 
As you come out of a curve, increase your speed gradually.
Changing Lanes
Your “blind spot” is the area around your vehicle that you 
cannot see from the driver’s seat even with the use of your 
mirrors. Avoid driving in another driver’s blind spot, if possible.
Before you change lanes:
• Use your turn signal to let other 
drivers know you plan to change 
lanes. 
• Check your side and rearview 
mirrors for tra昀케c approaching you 
from behind. 
• Glance over your le昀琀 shoulder if you are moving le昀琀. Glance 
over your right shoulder if you are moving right so you can 
see if there are any vehicles.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
31
Passing
Passing another vehicle is a normal part of driving, but can be 
very dangerous. Give yourself a good view of the road ahead by 
not following vehicles too closely, especially large trucks and 
trailers. Know the speed and accelera琀椀on ability of your vehicle. 
Be sure you have enough room to complete the maneuver. If you 
have to cut back into your lane too soon, you risk sideswiping 
the vehicle you are passing. If you do not get back into your lane 
soon enough, you risk a head-on collision with an oncoming 
vehicle. When in doubt, stay in your lane.
When passing another vehicle on a two-lane road, you should 
pass only to the le昀琀 of the vehicle. Your pass may not begin 
before the start of a passing zone and must be completed 
before you enter a no-passing zone. Do not exceed the speed 
limit when passing; it is against the law to exceed speed limits 
at any 琀椀me.
Check for a clear path ahead. Before you start to pass, check 
your mirrors and your vehicle’s blind spot by glancing over your 
shoulder to the rear in the direc琀椀on of the lane change. Turn 
on your signal, increase your speed and complete your pass as 
soon as possible. When you can see the vehicle you passed in 
your rearview mirror, signal and return to your lane.

32 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
No Passing
Signs and pavement markings help you determine where you 
are allowed to pass other vehicles. Do not pass in any area 
where your view of oncoming tra昀케c is limited.
Do not cross the center line to pass when:
Solid Yellow Line and No Passing 
Zone: You are in a no-passing zone. 
Do not a琀琀empt to pass a vehicle if 
you cannot safely return to your lane 
before entering a no-passing zone.
Hills and Curves: Your view of 
oncoming tra昀케c is blocked because 
you are on a hill or in a curve.
Intersec琀椀ons and Railroads: You are 
approaching, at or in an intersec琀椀on 
or railroad crossing.
Crosswalks: The vehicle ahead is 
stopped at a crosswalk to permit a 
pedestrian to cross.
You may cross the center line in a no-passing zone only if the 
right side of the road is blocked or if you are turning le昀琀.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
33
Passing on the Right
You may pass on the right only under one of the following 
condi琀椀ons:
• The vehicle you are passing is making or has signaled for a 
le昀琀 turn. There must be su昀케cient space to the right for you 
to pass without leaving the paved por琀椀on of the road or 
driving in a bike lane. The road in front of the vehicle you are 
passing must be clear.
• You are traveling on a road with two or more lanes traveling 
in the same direc琀椀on and the vehicle you are passing is in 
the le昀琀 lane. You may pass the vehicle using the right lane.
Use extra care when you pass on the right. Other drivers do not 
expect to be passed on the right. Do not exceed the speed limit 
to pass.
Being Passed
When another driver starts to pass, stay to the right. You can 
help the other driver pass you safely by checking oncoming 
tra昀케c and adjus琀椀ng your speed to let the vehicle move back 
into the right lane as soon as possible. Do not use your hands 
or lights to signal other drivers when to pass. The law prohibits 
昀氀ashing any of your signals at drivers to let them know when 
to pass.

34 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Freeway Driving
Freeways have several lanes in each direc琀椀on and speeds are 
higher than on other roads. Tra昀케c on freeways usually moves 
more e昀케ciently because access is controlled, there are few 
sharp curves, no railroad crossings, and no tra昀케c signals.
Drive at a steady speed; you will have less need to change lanes. 
Weaving through tra昀케c increases the risk of a collision and 
seldom saves 琀椀me. Try to keep pace with tra昀케c on the road, but 
do not be lured into exceeding the posted speed to stay with the 
昀氀ow of tra昀케c. If you drive at a speed below the 昀氀ow of tra昀케c, 
you must use the right lane. Watch for tra昀케c trying to enter the 
freeway and adjust your speed to permit a safe, smooth merge.
There are 琀椀mes when freeway tra昀케c slows. Be alert for any 
hint that tra昀케c on the freeway ahead is not moving at a normal 
pace. If you spot tra昀케c slowing ahead, lightly tap your brake 
pedal several 琀椀mes to alert drivers behind you.
Entering a Freeway
In most driving situa琀椀ons, you slow down or stop before you 
enter a busy road, but when entering a freeway you do the 
opposite. Use the freeway on-ramp to speed up and merge 
with fast-moving tra昀케c already on the road.
You must yield to tra昀케c already on the freeway. Use your 
mirrors and check your blind spots before merging. Adjust your 
speed to match tra昀케c already on the freeway. Keep moving 
if at all possible. Drivers behind you expect you to speed up 
rather than slow down.
If you start to enter a freeway the wrong way, a DO NOT 
ENTER or WRONG WAY sign will warn you of your mistake. 
Immediately pull o昀昀 to the side of the ramp and stop. Turn 
on your hazard lights to warn other vehicles. Cau琀椀ously turn 
around or back o昀昀 the ramp.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
35
Ramp meters are placed on some freeway on-ramps. These 
look like tra昀케c signals, but only operate during certain 琀椀mes of 
the day. For mul琀椀-lane on-ramps, each lane has a ramp meter. 
Only one vehicle can proceed each 琀椀me the green light comes 
on. When your light turns green, speed up to merge with tra昀케c 
on the freeway. Ramp meters will appear dark when not in use. 
Do not stop at a dark ramp meter.
Leaving a Freeway
When you leave a freeway, turn on your signal well ahead of 
琀椀me. Maintain your speed un琀椀l you are o昀昀 the freeway. Once 
on the exit ramp, begin slowing to the posted advisory speed.
Most freeway exits are numbered to help you quickly spot the 
exit you want to take. If you miss your exit, go to the next one. 
Never stop or back up on a freeway. The shoulder should only 
be used in an emergency.
Vehicle Trouble
If you have vehicle trouble on a freeway, move to the right 
shoulder or emergency stopping area. Turn on your hazard 
lights to warn other drivers. If possible, it is be琀琀er to stay in or 
near your vehicle on the side away from tra昀케c. Walking along a 
freeway is dangerous.
Driving a Large Vehicle or Towing
Large vehicles or vehicles towing a trailer are longer, higher, 
and wider than other passenger vehicles. They take longer to 
accelerate and to stop, and require more room to turn.
When you drive a pickup with a camper, a motor home, or tow 
a trailer, you should o昀琀en check your speed and the tra昀케c 
behind you. If tra昀케c is stacking up behind you, pull o昀昀 at the 
昀椀rst safe turnout to let the tra昀케c pass. Use the right lane 
on roads with two or more lanes of tra昀케c going in the same 
direc琀椀on.

36 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
It is against the law to allow passengers to ride in any type 
of trailer, except a commercial bus trailer, an independently-
steered trailer, or a trailer towed with a 昀椀昀琀h-wheel device. To 
carry passengers in a 昀椀昀琀h-wheel trailer it must have safety 
glazing materials in windows and doors with windows. It must 
also have a way for passengers in the trailer to get the driver’s 
a琀琀en琀椀on by a visual signal or sound. An unobstructed exit that 
opens from both inside and outside is also required.
Oregon law allows you to tow a maximum of one boat, 
general u琀椀lity trailer, or other vehicle behind a passenger or 
recrea琀椀onal vehicle. You cannot tow a second trailer or vehicle.
FINES:
• 1st o昀昀ense: Up to $1,000
• 2nd o昀昀ense: Up to $2,000
• 3rd o昀昀ense: Up to $2,500 
&, six months in jail

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
37
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. When entering a freeway
a. slow down.
b. speed up and merge with tra昀케c.
c. turn on your hazard lights to warn other tra昀케c. 
(page 34)
2. A broken yellow line on your side of the road only means
a. passing is not allowed on both sides.
b. passing is allowed on both sides.
c. passing is allowed on your side. 
(page 22)
3. When passing another vehicle
a. it is okay to exceed the speed limit.
b. do not begin your pass before the start of a passing zone.
c. you can pass in an intersec琀椀on if no cars are wai琀椀ng to 
cross. 
(page 31)
4. When you stop behind another vehicle, you should be far 
enough away to see
a. where the rear 琀椀res meet the road.
b. the top of the bumper.
c. the brake lights. 
(page 27)

38 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Turns & Intersections
Turn Signals
Turn signals are used to communicate with other drivers where 
you intend to go. You must signal before you turn, change lanes, 
exit a roundabout, or pull away from a curb. Before making 
such a move, be sure you can do so safely. Check tra昀케c ahead, 
behind and to the side.
If your vehicle is moving in tra昀케c, use your turn signal at least 
100 feet before the turn or lane change. When you are parked 
at a curb and about to reenter tra昀케c, use a signal long enough 
to alert tra昀케c that you are moving into the lane.
Only use hand-and-arm signals in daylight and when you can 
clearly see people and vehicles at a distance of 1,000 feet. You 
must use turn signal lights at night or when visibility is poor. 
Hand-and-arm signals should not be used any 琀椀me you are 
driving a wide or long vehicle.
Hand-and-arm signals
Right Turn
Le昀琀 Turn
Stop or decrease speed
Do not rely solely on the turn signal of another driver. The 
driver may signal to turn right and instead turn le昀琀, or may turn 
without signaling.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
39
Turns
Rules for turning apply at all loca琀椀ons, 
such as driveways and alleys, not just at 
intersec琀椀ons. Check for tra昀케c behind 
and beside you well before you turn. 
Turn smoothly and at a lower speed. The 
diagram on the right illustrates the lanes 
to use when making le昀琀 and right turns.
You may turn across a bicycle lane, 
but do not move into a bicycle lane in prepara琀椀on for a turn. 
Always check for people riding in your blind spot before turning. 
This includes looking over your shoulder and checking your 
mirrors. Watch for people riding bicycles who may ride up 
beside your vehicle while you are preparing to make a turn. You 
must yield to people riding bicycles in a bicycle lane or on a 
sidewalk. Check the crosswalk and stop for pedestrians.
Lane use control signs or pavement markings may be used to 
direct you into the correct lane before turning. If you are at 
an intersec琀椀on and in the wrong lane to turn, go to the next 
intersec琀椀on. It is safer to drive around the block than it is to risk 
a collision due to a last-minute lane or direc琀椀on change.
Right Turns: Get as near as you can to the right curb or edge of 
the road. Just before entering the intersec琀椀on, look to the le昀琀, 
to the front, to the right and to the le昀琀 again for tra昀케c.
Le昀琀 Turns: On a two-way road, approach the turn with your 
vehicle in the lane just to the right of the center line. Just 
before entering the intersec琀椀on, look to the le昀琀, to the front, 
to the right and to the le昀琀 again for oncoming tra昀케c and cross 
tra昀케c. Oregon law requires a driver to yield the right of way 
to oncoming tra昀케c un琀椀l it is safe to turn. Turn just before the 
imaginary center point in the intersec琀椀on. Drive just to the 
right of the center line of the street you are entering.
It is illegal to execute a le昀琀 turn onto a two-way road against a red 
light. If a le昀琀 turn lane is provided, you must turn from that lane.

40 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Le昀琀 Turn: One-Way Road to One-Way 
Road: Approach the turn in the tra昀케c 
lane that is nearest the le昀琀 curb. Turn 
into the nearest le昀琀 lane for tra昀케c on 
the road you are entering. You may 
make this turn against a red light a昀琀er 
stopping and yielding to tra昀케c and 
pedestrians.
Le昀琀 or Right Turn: Two-Way Road to 
One-Way Road: Approach the turn in 
the tra昀케c lane that is nearest to the 
direc琀椀on of the turn. Turn into the 
nearest lane for tra昀케c on the road you 
are entering. You may make this turn 
against a red light a昀琀er stopping and 
yielding to tra昀케c and pedestrians.
Le昀琀 Turn: One-Way Road to Two-Way 
Road: Approach the turn in the tra昀케c 
lane nearest the le昀琀 curb. Turn into the 
lane just to the right of the center line. 
You cannot make this turn against a 
red light.
Dual Le昀琀 or Right Turn Lanes: Mul琀椀ple  
lanes may turn in the same direc琀椀on at 
the same 琀椀me when lane use control 
signs or pavement markings permit it.
Be sure to follow the pavement 
markings and stay in your lane when 
execu琀椀ng turns onto roadways with 
more lanes than the lane you are 
turning from.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
41
Turning Errors 
The general rule for turning is to turn from the nearest lane 
in the direc琀椀on you are traveling to the nearest lane in the 
direc琀椀on you want to go. Avoid swinging wide or changing 
lanes while turning.
Turning Error Examples: 
Into Wrong Lane
From Wrong Lane
U-Turns
U-turns are prohibited in these loca琀椀ons:
• Intersec琀椀ons controlled by a tra昀케c signal, unless a sign 
permits the turn.
• Between intersec琀椀ons in a city.
• Any loca琀椀on within city limits where your vehicle cannot be 
seen by tra昀케c coming from either direc琀椀on within 500 feet.
• Any loca琀椀on outside city limits where your vehicle cannot be 
seen by tra昀케c coming from either direc琀椀on within 1,000 feet.
• At or on a railroad crossing.
• Any loca琀椀on where U-turns are prohibited by o昀케cial signs or 
markings.

42 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Intersections
Stop signs, yield signs, and tra昀케c signals control the 昀氀ow of 
tra昀케c at busy intersec琀椀ons. A defensive driver never assumes a 
stop sign or a tra昀케c signal will stop approaching tra昀케c.
At an intersec琀椀on with a stop sign, steady red signal or 昀氀ashing 
red signal, you must stop before the marked stop line or 
crosswalk, if there is one. If there is no stop line or crosswalk, 
stop before the unmarked crossing area before entering the 
intersec琀椀on (see sec琀椀on on Pedestrians). Always yield to 
vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians and people riding 
bicycles, as well as tra昀케c in the intersec琀椀on when making an 
allowed turn. A昀琀er stopping, if you are unable to see tra昀케c 
coming from your le昀琀 and right, slightly pull forward and scan the 
area. Even if you have a green light, do not enter an intersec琀椀on 
unless there is room for your vehicle on the other side.
At intersec琀椀ons with stop signs in all four direc琀椀ons, it is 
common courtesy to allow the driver who stops 昀椀rst to go 昀椀rst. 
When in doubt, yield to the driver on your right. Never assume 
another driver will yield the right of way to you.
At intersec琀椀ons with two-way stop signs across from each 
other, the driver turning le昀琀 should yield the right of way to 
approaching or oncoming tra昀케c going straight.
As you approach an intersec琀椀on with no signs or signals, 昀椀rst 
look to the le昀琀 to make sure cross tra昀케c is yielding right of 
way, then look to the front and to the right. Be prepared to 
stop. Yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersec琀椀on 
or approaching from your right. As you enter the intersec琀椀on, 
check again for unusual or unexpected ac琀椀ons.
If you are the driver on a road that ends at a “T” intersec琀椀on 
with no signs or signals, you must yield to drivers on the 
through road.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
43
Roundabouts
Roundabouts, rotaries, and tra昀케c circles are all 
terms used for circular intersec琀椀ons with a center 
island. Tra昀케c moves in one direc琀椀on, counterclockwise, 
around the center island. A warning sign with arrows in a circle 
pa琀琀ern indicates a circular intersec琀椀on is ahead.
The following steps will help you travel safely through a 
roundabout.
Approach: Slow down as you 
approach the roundabout. Look 
for signs to determine where 
your exit is located.
Watch for people riding 
bicycles; they will either merge 
into tra昀케c or use the sidewalk. 
When approaching the 
crosswalk, stop for pedestrians 
using the crosswalk in your lane.
Enter: Before you enter the roundabout, you must yield to 
tra昀케c inside as well as exi琀椀ng the roundabout. Wait for a gap 
and merge into tra昀케c. Be prepared to stop if necessary.
Proceed: Once inside the 
roundabout, move around the 
circle un琀椀l you reach your exit.
Allow people riding bicycles 
that have merged into tra昀케c 
the full travel lane. Do not pass 
a person riding a bicycle within 
the roundabout.
Exit: Indicate your plan to exit 
using your right turn signal. 
Watch for pedestrians in the 
crosswalk and be prepared to stop.

44 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Mul琀椀-lane Roundabouts
Roundabouts may 
have one or more 
lanes. Here are a 
few 琀椀ps to help you 
safely nego琀椀ate a 
mul琀椀-lane roundabout.
Lane Choice: Prior to 
entering the roundabout, pay 
close a琀琀en琀椀on to exit and 
lane use signs, along with 
pavement markings. Enter 
the roundabout using the 
appropriate lane for your exit.
Maintain your lane posi琀椀on un琀椀l you exit. Avoid lane changes 
while inside the roundabout, if possible.
Do Not Pass: Do not a琀琀empt to overtake or pass any vehicles, 
especially large trucks and trailers within the roundabout. 
Trucks may need to straddle both lanes. It is illegal to pass or 
drive beside a truck within the roundabout.
Emergency Vehicles in Roundabouts
Do not enter a roundabout when emergency vehicles are 
approaching. Pull over to the right. Allow other vehicles to clear 
the intersec琀椀on so the emergency vehicles can move through 
the roundabout. Never stop while inside the roundabout. Instead, 
move through and exit the roundabout. Once you exit, pull over 
to the right shoulder and allow emergency vehicles to pass.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
45
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. When turning from one road to another
a. swing wide to make the turn.
b. move into the bicycle lane prior to the turn.
c. turn into the closest lane in the direc琀椀on you want to go. 
(page 41)
2. When you reach a roundabout you must
a. yield, wait for a gap and merge into tra昀케c.
b. stop before entering then merge into tra昀케c.
c. accelerate to merge into tra昀케c. 
(page 43)
3. When stopped on a two-way road at a red light wai琀椀ng to 
turn le昀琀 onto a one-way, you
a. must wait un琀椀l the light is green.
b. can only turn on the red light if a le昀琀 turn sign is posted.
c. can turn on the red light a昀琀er yielding to other tra昀케c. 
(page 40)

46 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Sharing the Road
Drivers of passenger vehicles share the road with many other 
users. Pedestrians, people riding bicycles and motorcycles, 
highway workers and persons using a mode of transporta琀椀on 
such as a skateboard or scooter in a public way, crosswalk or 
shoulder of the highway are all vulnerable users of the road. 
These users of the road are vulnerable because they can be hard 
to see and may not have protec琀椀on against injury in a collision. 
While driving it is important to look for all types of road users.
Pedestrians
The term pedestrian refers to people walking, as well as rolling 
with skateboards, scooters and wheelchairs, etc. You must stop 
for pedestrians crossing the road at any marked or unmarked 
crosswalk. A pedestrian is crossing the road when any part or 
extension (cane, wheelchair, bicycle, etc.) of the pedestrian 
moves onto the road.
Stop and remain stopped for a pedestrian crossing in a 
crosswalk when the pedestrian is:
• In your lane of travel,
• In a lane next to your lane of travel, including a bike lane, or
• In the lane you are turning into.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
47
If you are turning at an intersec琀椀on that has a tra昀케c signal, 
before you begin to turn, the pedestrian must be six feet or 
more from the lane you are turning into.
If you are turning at an intersec琀椀on that doesn’t have a tra昀케c 
signal, before you begin to turn, the pedestrian must be past 
the lane you are turning into, plus the next lane.
Do not pass a vehicle stopped at a crosswalk, it is against the 
law. The driver may be wai琀椀ng for a pedestrian to cross the road.
You are not required to stop if the pedestrian is in a crosswalk 
on the other side of a safety island.
There is a crosswalk at every intersec琀椀on, even if it is not 
marked by painted lines. To determine where an unmarked 
crosswalk is, imagine that a sidewalk or shoulder at the corner 
extends to the other side. An unmarked crosswalk is at least six 
feet wide and exists even if there is no sidewalk or shoulder.
Crosswalk Examples 
Marked Crosswalks
Unmarked Crosswalks
Mid-block Crosswalks
A mid-block crosswalk may have a 昀氀ashing yellow light that 
indicates a pedestrian is crossing or about to cross the road.
Do not stop with any por琀椀on of your vehicle overhanging the 
crosswalk area. Blocking a crosswalk forces pedestrians to go 
around your vehicle and puts them in a dangerous situa琀椀on.
If you cross a sidewalk, such as when entering or leaving a 
parking lot, alley or driveway, stop before reaching the sidewalk 
and yield to pedestrians and people riding bicycles.

48 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
LOOK OUT
LOOK OUT
FOR KIDS!
DRIVE SAFELY.
The Way to Go. Transportation Safety – ODOT
White Canes and Guide Dogs
You must give the right of way to 
a pedestrian with limited vision 
or any pedestrian who is blind or 
deaf and blind carrying a white 
cane or using a guide dog. Stop 
if the person is about to cross or is crossing the road. Remain 
stopped un琀椀l the person has crossed the en琀椀re road, even if 
you have a green light.
Children at Play
Be extra careful in residen琀椀al areas and places where children 
are likely to be, such as a park. Do not drive too close to parked 
cars that may block your view. Be watchful when backing in or 
out of a driveway. Children are unpredictable and may run or 
be playing behind your vehicle.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
49
School Zones
A school zone is a sec琀椀on of road adjacent 
to 
a school or a school crosswalk where signs 
designate a school zone.
This 昀椀ve-sided sign marks the beginning of school zones and 
warns you about school crossings. These signs will be a yellow 
color. Ac琀椀vely look for children and be ready to stop.
A school speed zone is an area where a reduced speed of 20 
mph applies and is de昀椀ned by school speed signs. The school 
speed zone begins at the SCHOOL SPEED LIMIT 20 sign and ends 
at the END SCHOOL ZONE sign or at another posted speed sign.
School Zone Signs
School speed zone signs tell you when you must obey the 
reduced speed limit of 20 mph.
Flashing School Speed Limit Sign: Any 琀椀me a yellow 
light on a school speed sign is 昀氀ashing indicates that 
children are arriving at or leaving school.
School Hours Speed Limit Sign: Between the hours 
of 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. on a day school is in session. If 
you are unsure whether or not it is a school day, slow 
down to 20 mph.
School Speed Limit Sign for When Children Are 
Present: Any day, at any 琀椀me children are present. 
Children are present means:
• children are wai琀椀ng at a crosswalk.
• children are occupying or walking within a 
crosswalk.
• a tra昀케c patrol member is present to assist 
children at a crosswalk.

50 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Stop and yield to children when they enter the crosswalk or if 
a school crossing guard signals you to do so. Remain stopped 
un琀椀l the children clear the crosswalk.
Bicycles
People riding bicycles are more di昀케cult to see than other 
vehicles. They can be hidden in your blind spot and easily missed.
People bicycling o昀琀en react di昀昀erently to road hazards than 
drivers of motor vehicles. These hazards could include potholes, 
glass, li琀琀er, storm grates, and railroad tracks, as well as opened 
doors of parked vehicles. Any of these items could cause a 
person riding a bicycle to move into your path or to slow down. 
Give people riding bicycles plenty of room to move around 
these hazards.
When you approach a person riding a bicycle, be alert and 
prepare to slow down, if needed. You may not be able to 
predict a bicyclist’s inten琀椀ons. As a driver, you need to know 
the following rules to properly share the road with people 
riding bicycles:
• Do not drive or park in a bike lane. You may cross a bike lane 
when turning or when entering or leaving an alley, driveway, 
or private road.
• Do not move into or travel in a bike lane in prepara琀椀on for a 
turn.
• You must yield to people riding bicycles in a bike lane or on a 
sidewalk before you turn across the lane or sidewalk.
• You must yield to people riding bicycles at intersec琀椀ons the 
same as you do for other types of vehicles.
• At speeds greater than 35 mph, you may only pass a person 
on a bicycle traveling in your lane if you leave enough 
distance to prevent contact with the person riding a bicycle 
if they were to fall.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
51
• The same rules for passing other vehicles apply to passing 
people riding bicycles. If you cannot pass safely, you must slow 
down and remain behind the bicycle un琀椀l it is safe to pass.
• Operators of motorized wheelchairs, scooters, and personal 
assis琀椀ve mobility devices are permi琀琀ed to use bike lanes 
and paths. You must yield to these operators as you would a 
person riding a bicycle.
Bike Boxes
Most bike boxes are a green painted 
box on the road with a white bicycle 
symbol. Bike lanes approaching and 
leaving the box may also be green.
As a driver, you must stop for a tra昀케c 
signal behind the bike box. Do not 
stop in the box. People riding bicycles 
will move into the box in front of you 
at the intersec琀椀on. No right turns are 
allowed at these intersec琀椀ons when the tra昀케c signal is red. 
If turning right on a green light, you must signal and yield to 
people riding bicycles on the right.
Sharrow
A sharrow indicates that the lane is shared and 
people riding bicycles may be in the road. It is 
indicated by two chevrons above a bicycle symbol 
painted on the road.
To learn what is required of a person riding 
a bicycle, read the Oregon Bicycling Manual 
available at your local DMV o昀케ce or online at 
www.oregon.gov/odot/DMV/Pages/Online_Bicycle_
Manual/Table_of_Contents.aspx

52 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Motorcycles and 
Mopeds
A motorcycle or moped is 
more di昀케cult to see than other 
vehicles. They can be hidden 
in your blind spot and easily 
missed.
It can be di昀케cult to judge 
how far away a person riding 
a motorcycle is or how fast 
they are going. You must 
yield to an oncoming person 
riding a motorcycle just as 
you would any other type 
of vehicle. It is safest to wait 
un琀椀l they pass to make a turn. 
When following a person 
riding a motorcycle, allow more distance between your vehicle 
and the person riding a motorcycle than you would another car.
Turn signals do not automa琀椀cally cancel on some motorcycles 
and the rider may forget to turn the signal o昀昀. Before you make 
a turn in front of an oncoming motorcycle that has its turn 
signal on, be sure the rider is actually slowing to turn rather 
than riding with their signal on by mistake.
It is against the law to share a lane with a person riding a 
motorcycle or moped. When passing, you must allow them a 
full lane.
Weather and road condi琀椀ons may impact people riding 
motorcycles and mopeds more than other vehicles. Strong 
winds can move a person riding a motorcycle out of their lane 
of travel. Road surfaces such as gravel, debris, pavement seams, 
grooved pavement and manhole covers may cause people 
riding motorcycles to change speed or direc琀椀on. Increase your 
following distance.
Transportation Safety – ODOT
Ride & Roll Safely. The Way to Go.
Protect
Your
Melon
Any way you roll,
wear a helmet.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
53
Large Vehicles
Large vehicles such as recrea琀椀onal vehicles, vehicles towing 
trailers, trucks and commercial buses take longer to accelerate 
and require more room to maneuver. These vehicles take about 
three 琀椀mes the distance to stop than smaller vehicles traveling 
at the same speed. Keep the following in mind when sharing 
the road with large vehicles:
Side blind spots: Large vehicles have larger blind spots on both 
sides of their vehicles than smaller vehicles. If you can’t see the 
driver in the side mirror of the large vehicle, the driver can’t see 
you.
Rear blind spot: Large vehicles have a deep blind spot directly 
behind them where the driver cannot see your vehicle. You also 
severely reduce your own view when following too closely. Do 
not pull up too close behind a stopped large vehicle as it may 
roll back slightly when star琀椀ng forward.
Unsafe passing: It takes longer to pass 
a large vehicle. Complete your pass 
as quickly as possible and don’t stay 
alongside the vehicle. It is dangerous to 
stay in a blind spot too long because the 
driver doesn’t know you’re there. Look 
for the en琀椀re front of the vehicle in your 
rearview mirror before pulling in front.
If there is water on the road, the spray from a large vehicle will 
seriously reduce your vision. You should keep as far away from 
the vehicle as you can, while staying in your lane.
Turns: Large vehicles o昀琀en cannot see vehicles directly behind 
or beside them when they are a琀琀emp琀椀ng to nego琀椀ate a turn. 
Observe their turn signals. Do not cut in between a large 
vehicle and the curb or shoulder. Large vehicles may need to 
swing wide and use more than one lane to start or 昀椀nish a turn. 
Be aware of long loads that may extend into adjacent lanes 
during a turn. When you see a large vehicle making a turn, do 
not crowd the intersec琀椀on; allow it to complete the turn.
OK

54 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Backing: When a large vehicle is backing, it may need to block 
the street to maneuver. Never cross behind a large vehicle that 
is preparing to back up or is in the process of backing.
Hills or mountain roads: Large vehicles cannot maintain speed 
when climbing hills and must go slowly down hills to stay under 
control. Smoking wheels or a high speed can be a sign of brake 
loss. If you encounter this situa琀椀on, leave more space and do 
not pass.
Pilot Vehicles
Pilot vehicles are specially marked vehicles that lead or follow a 
vehicle carrying an especially large load.
• If you see a pilot vehicle in oncoming tra昀케c, reduce your 
speed and posi琀椀on your vehicle as far to the right as 
possible, while staying in your lane.
• If you are following a pilot vehicle, increase your following 
distance.
• Be cau琀椀ous when you pass a pilot vehicle or the vehicle with 
the large load.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
55
School, Places of Worship or Worker 
and Public Transit Buses
School Buses
School buses have 昀氀ashing amber and red lights near the top 
of the bus on the front and rear. They may be equipped with a 
stop arm that extends from the bus near the driver’s window 
when the red lights begin to 昀氀ash.
Flashing amber lights warn tra昀케c that the bus is about to stop 
on the road to load or unload children. Prepare to stop. When 
the red lights 昀氀ash, stop before reaching the bus and remain 
stopped un琀椀l the driver turns o昀昀 the 昀氀ashing red lights.
If you are on a divided highway with two roads separated by an 
unpaved median strip or barrier, you must stop only if you are 
on the same side of the road as the bus.
A painted median strip or turn lane does not create two 
separate roads. In this case, all lanes of tra昀케c must stop.
Stopped Bus Examples 
Divided Highway
Painted Medians

56 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Places of Worship or Worker Buses
Flashing amber and red lights are permi琀琀ed on places of 
worship and worker transport buses. If the bus turns on 
昀氀ashing amber or red lights, you must treat these lights the 
same as you would a school bus.
Public Transit Buses
Public transit buses o昀琀en pull to a curb 
to load or unload passengers. Vehicles 
approaching from the rear must yield when 
a bus driver signals to re-enter a tra昀케c lane 
and there is an electric sign 昀氀ashing “yield” 
on the back of the bus.
Other Vehicles
Slow Moving Vehicles
Slow moving vehicles, such as farm equipment, must 
display the SLOW MOVING VEHICLE emblem when 
using a public highway. The emblem contains a re昀氀ec琀椀ve, red 
border and a 昀氀uorescent orange center. Be prepared to slow 
down or adjust your posi琀椀on when you see this sign.
Over-Length and Over-Width Loads
A red 昀氀ag, at least 12 inches square, must be shown at the end 
of any load that extends 4 feet or more beyond the rear of the 
vehicle. A red light, visible for 500 feet to the rear and sides, 
must replace the red 昀氀ag when limited visibility condi琀椀ons exist.
Passenger vehicles must not carry loads that extend beyond 
the sides of the fenders on the le昀琀 side. Loads may not extend 
more than 6 inches beyond the sides of the right fenders. Loads 
may not extend more than 4 feet in front of any vehicle.
YIELD
it’s the 
Law
12
YIELD

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
57
Funeral Processions
Funeral processions are exempt from certain rules of the road. 
Vehicles in a funeral procession may enter an intersec琀椀on 
without stopping and do not have to obey tra昀케c control 
devices. Other vehicles must yield right of way to funeral 
processions.
If you are not a member of the funeral procession, it is against 
the law for you to join or drive between vehicles in the 
procession.
Approaching Stopped Vehicles
If you are on a road with two or more lanes of tra昀케c going the 
same direc琀椀on and you approach any motor vehicle that is 
stopped with lights 昀氀ashing, you must change lanes so you do 
not drive next to the stopped vehicle. You may also slow down 
by at least 5 miles per hour under the posted speed limit. Allow 
the stopped vehicle as much room as safely possible.
When you approach emergency scenes, slow down and be 
prepared to stop. Do not drive over 昀椀re hoses unless told to do 
so by o昀케cials at the scene.

58 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Emergency Vehicles
You must yield right of way to emergency vehicles, such as 昀椀re 
trucks, police vehicles, and ambulances, when they approach 
from any direc琀椀on using a light or siren.
When you see or hear an emergency vehicle warning, you must 
immediately drive as close as you safely can to the right side 
of the road and stop. Do not stop in an intersec琀椀on. Do not 
drive or stop in a way that interferes with these vehicles. Stay 
stopped un琀椀l the emergency vehicle has passed or un琀椀l an 
o昀케cer tells you to move.
A昀琀er the emergency vehicle passes, you must stay at least 500 
feet behind the vehicle.
Police Stops
Police vehicles a琀琀emp琀椀ng to stop drivers will do so by turning 
on 昀氀ashing lights or a siren. If you are stopped:
• Drive as close as you safely can to the right side of the road, 
stop and turn o昀昀 the engine. Do not stop in an intersec琀椀on 
or pull into the center median of a highway.
• Limit your movements and those of any passengers.
• Keep your hands on the steering wheel. Passengers should 
keep their hands in plain view.
• Show your driving privilege and/or vehicle registra琀椀on only 
when requested.
• Stay in your vehicle. Do not get out unless requested.
• If it is dark, turn on the vehicle’s interior light a昀琀er stopping 
and before the o昀케cer approaches.
• Do not argue with the o昀케cer at the scene. Tra昀케c viola琀椀ons 
and tra昀케c crimes charged against you are decided in court.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
59
Work Zones
Work Zones are de昀椀ned by orange tra昀케c control 
devices. When entering a work zone you need to be 
alert to changes in the roadway. Workers and 
construc琀椀on equipment may be close to tra昀케c. 
Tra昀케c 昀椀nes are doubled in all work zones. You are 
expected to yield to workers. 
Work zones can change the 昀氀ow of tra昀케c. You 
can expect to be guided through a work zone 
by signs, cones, 昀氀aggers, lane markings, or other 
devices. Orange signs warn you what to expect 
ahead. Orange cones guide you away from the road 
construc琀椀on. The temporary speed posted in a work 
zone applies at all 琀椀mes, even if workers are not 
visible. The reduced speed limit applies un琀椀l you 
see an End Work Zone Speed Limit sign or another 
posted speed limit sign.
You can expect to be stopped by 昀氀aggers or automated devices 
in work zones on two lane roads. Flaggers use signs and hand 
signals to tell you which direc琀椀on to travel, to slow down, or stop. 
Automated 昀氀agger devices have the same du琀椀es as a 昀氀agger. 
Automated 昀氀agger devices have red and yellow lights and a stop 
arm. Stop when the red light is on and the arm is down. Proceed 
when the yellow light is 昀氀ashing and the arm is up. 
Work Zone Tra昀케c Signalers: 
Flagger
Automated Flagger

60 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
On freeways you can expect to remain driving through the work 
zone. There may be fewer, narrow or new lanes. You can expect 
to merge with other lanes of tra昀케c. You can expect to drive very 
close to cones, workers and construc琀椀on equipment. Slow down 
and pay a琀琀en琀椀on. 
Construc琀椀on vehicles may be driving in work zones. Do not 
follow construc琀椀on vehicles when in a work zone. Construc琀椀on 
vehicles may enter the road and cause slowing in a work zone.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
61
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. Work zones may have temporary speeds posted that apply
a. when workers are present.
b. at all 琀椀mes.
c. at night. 
(page 59)
2. When on a 4-lane road with a painted median or turn lane 
and a school bus is stopped with 昀氀ashing red lights
a. tra昀케c in all lanes must stop.
b. tra昀케c behind the bus must stop.
c. no tra昀케c needs to stop. 
(page 55)
3. If a large vehicle swings le昀琀 but has their right turn signal on 
and you are also turning right
a. stay beside the large vehicle on the right.
b. wait un琀椀l the large vehicle turns before you turn right.
c. squeeze between the large vehicle and the curb. 
(page 53)
4. A person on a bicycle is riding in front of you within a travel 
lane. You are driving 45 mph and your lane is marked with a 
broken yellow center line. You
a. can pass to the le昀琀 if you leave enough distance to 
prevent contact with the person on the bicycle if they fall 
into your lane.
b. need to roll down your window and get their a琀琀en琀椀on 
then tell them to move out of the travel lane so you can 
pass safely.
c. cannot pass the person on a bicycle at any 琀椀me. 
(page 50)
(Con琀椀nued)

62 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
5. When star琀椀ng through an intersec琀椀on and you see an 
ambulance behind you, you must
a. stop in the intersec琀椀on and allow the ambulance to go 
around.
b. pull to the right in the intersec琀椀on and stop.
c. drive through the intersec琀椀on, pull to the right and stop. 
(page 58)
Distracted  
driving  
 is illegal.
Before you start your car…
Drive Safely. The Way to Go.  Transportation Safety – ODOT

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
63
Railroad Crossings, 
Light Rail & Street Cars
Railroad Crossings
Signs and signals are used to mark railroad crossings. When 
you see them, look, listen, and slow down because you may 
have to stop.
A railroad advance sign warns you that a railroad 
crossing is ahead.
A railroad crossbuck assembly will include a yield 
or stop sign. Obey the posted sign. If there is 
more than one track, a sign below the crossbuck 
indicates the number of tracks.
A crossing signal system includes 昀氀ashing red 
lights and may have a gate with red 昀氀ashing 
lights that are ac琀椀vated when a train is nearby. 
Railroad crossings have pavement markings that 
include a large “X” with the le琀琀ers “RR.” Only cross the tracks 
if you are sure you can completely clear the crossing. Be aware 
that one train may be blocking the view of another one.
Remember:
• Never stop on the tracks.
• Never try to beat a train at a crossing.
• The train you see is closer than it seems.
• Trains cannot stop quickly.
• All school buses, hazmat vehicles and some 
school ac琀椀vity vehicles must stop at railroad tracks.  
Be prepared to stop when following these vehicles.
• One train may be blocking the view of another one.

64 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
When required to stop, do so at the stop line. If there is no stop 
line, stop at least 15 feet from the nearest rail.
Stop before railroad tracks when:
• Flashing red lights are ac琀椀vated.
• An approaching train is clearly visible or is so close to the 
crossing that it would be hazardous for you to try to cross.
• A stop sign is posted, even if you do not see a train coming.
• A 昀氀agger signals you to stop.
It is against the law to drive around or under a crossing 
gate – while down or while being raised or lowered – and it is 
extremely dangerous. A昀琀er stopping, do not start across the 
tracks un琀椀l you are sure you can do so safely. At crossings with 
mul琀椀ple tracks, look carefully to see if a second train is coming 
on another track from either direc琀椀on.
If a vehicle, person or object is stuck on the railroad tracks:
1. Get out of the 
vehicle!
2. Get away from 
the tracks, even 
if you do not 
see a train.
3. If it’s safe, 
look for an 
Emergency 
No琀椀昀椀ca琀椀on System (ENS) sign 
located on a post at the crossing 
near the tracks to no琀椀fy the railroads 
of the obstruc琀椀on in the tracks so they can alert incoming 
trains.
4. If a train approaches, move at a 45 degree angle from the 
tracks in the direc琀椀on of the train so you are not hit with 
debris.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
65
Travelling Around Streetcars & Light Rail 
Trains
Streetcars and light rail trains are electric transit vehicles that 
run on tracks embedded in the streets. They some琀椀mes travel 
in the same lanes as cars and make frequent stops to pick up 
and drop o昀昀 passengers, much like buses. These streetcars and 
trains are a key part of a city's public transporta琀椀on system, 
helping people travel easily through downtown. Because 
they share the road with cars, drivers need to be extra careful 
around them. Here are some simple rules to help you stay safe.
Let Streetcars and Trains Go First:
• Always let streetcars and trains go 昀椀rst. Do not try to pass a 
streetcar or train, unless it is safe to do so.
• If a streetcar or train stops to pick up or drop o昀昀 people, stay 
behind it un琀椀l it moves again or the people are safely away.
Do Not Block Tracks:
• When approaching tracks at an intersec琀椀on, stay behind any 
stop line before crossing tracks.
• Never park on streetcar or train tracks. Park behind the 
solid white line separa琀椀ng the parking area from the track. If 
there is no white line, park as close to the curb as possible 
away from the rails. 
• Always check for approaching streetcars or trains before 
opening vehicle doors.
• Always make sure your parked car is clear of the tracks so a 
streetcar or train can pass.

66 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Be Careful at Intersec琀椀ons and Making Turns:
• Never turn in front of a streetcar or train traveling in the 
same direc琀椀on as you from an adjacent lane, even if the 
streetcar or train is stopped.
• Never turn in front of an approaching light rail train or 
streetcar, unless safe to do.
• Slow down and look both ways before crossing tracks at an 
intersec琀椀on.
• When turning where there are tracks, look both ways for 
streetcars or trains. Signal your turn and make sure it is safe. 
If there is a le昀琀 turn signal wait for a proper signal before 
you make a le昀琀 turn over the tracks.
Watch for Pedestrians:
• Be careful where streetcars and trains stop. Look out for 
people ge琀�ng on or o昀昀 the streetcar. Passengers will run 
across lanes to catch the streetcar or train.
• Follow pedestrian signals and let people cross the street 
safely.
Check Before Changing Lanes:
• Check for streetcars and trains before changing lanes, you 
may not be aware they are close behind you.
• Streetcars and trains cannot stop quickly. Avoid braking 
suddenly or performing unpredictable moves in front of or 
around them.
Following these rules will help keep everyone safe. Always be 
alert and drive carefully. If you do make contact with a streetcar 
or train, wait for the operator or police to give you direc琀椀on on 
what to do.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
67
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. When passing a stopped streetcar or light rail train, you 
should 
a. maintain speed while passing.
b. stop and stay stopped un琀椀l the streetcar or train moves.
c. watch for pedestrians and pass with cau琀椀on. 
(page 66)
2. If you are required to stop at a railroad crossing and there is 
no stop line, you must stop at least ___ feet from the nearest 
rail.
a. 15
b. 12
c. 20 
(page 64)

68 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Parking & Stopping
There are di昀昀erent types of parking. When leaving a parked or 
stopped posi琀椀on, check your blind spots and mirrors, and yield 
to all other tra昀케c.
Parallel Parking
Park in the direc琀椀on vehicles are 
moving in the lane. Park parallel to 
and no more than 12 inches from 
the curb. If there is no curb, park 
as close as possible to the edge 
of the shoulder. If parking areas 
are marked, your wheels must be 
within the marked space.
1. Pull even with Car A.
2. Back slowly toward the space 
and turn wheels sharply.
3. Straighten wheels.
Angle Parking
This type of parking is common in 
parking lots, shopping centers, and 
on wide streets. When driving large 
vehicles avoid parking in spaces that 
obstruct tra昀케c on the road.
Signs may be posted to indicate when 
a parking area is reverse angle or back-in only.
A
A
A

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
69
Parking on Hills
Always set your parking brake. Leave your vehicle in gear 
if it has a manual transmission or in park for an automa琀椀c 
transmission. Turn your front wheels as indicated below to 
prevent your vehicle from rolling downhill in case the brake fails.
Downhill Against a 
Curb: Turn your wheels 
toward the curb.
Uphill Against a Curb: 
Turn your wheels 
toward the travel lane.
No Curb: Turn your 
wheels toward the 
edge of the road.
Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabili琀椀es
Oregon issues special parking 
permits to persons with disabili琀椀es 
or groups that transport persons 
with disabili琀椀es. Spaces may have 
the disabled symbol on the ground 
as well as a sign with the symbol 
placed at the front of each space.
It is illegal to park in a space marked for persons with 
disabili琀椀es unless you have a valid disabled parking permit.
PARKING
RESERVED

70 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Why can’t I park in a Disabled Person parking space? 
• It can be expensive! Fines begin at $165 and go up to 
$1,000 if you are not a Disabled Person Parking Permit 
holder. This includes parking even for “just a few minutes”.
• For more informa琀椀on: see the Disabled Person Parking 
Permit Placards and Decals webpage -  
www.oregon.gov/odot/DMV/Pages/Form/Oregon_Disabled_
Person_Parking_Placard.aspx 
• To apply for a Disabled Person Parking Permit: see the 
Disabled Person Parking Permits webpage -  
www.oregon.gov/odot/dmv/pages/driverid/disparking.aspx
No Parking
The rules about parking and stopping apply whether you are in 
your vehicle or not. You cannot stop or park your vehicle in any 
of the loca琀椀ons iden琀椀昀椀ed below. This does not apply if your 
vehicle breaks down and you cannot get it out of the tra昀케c 
lanes or there is not enough room o昀昀 the road on the shoulder 
for you to stop or park.
• In a tra昀케c lane, on a highway, street or road.
• Within an intersec琀椀on.
• On the road side of any parked vehicle (double parking).
• On a sidewalk, crosswalk, bicycle lane or path.
• On any railroad or light rail tracks.
• On a bridge, overpass, or in a tunnel.
• Between separate roads of a divided highway.
• Near construc琀椀on or road work when stopping or parking 
would interfere with tra昀케c.
• Any place where o昀케cial signs, tra昀케c control devices, painted 
diagonal stripes, or other pavement markings prohibit 
parking.
• In front of a public or private driveway.
• Within 10 feet of a 昀椀re hydrant.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
71
• Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to a 昀椀re sta琀椀on on 
the same side of the street or within 75 feet on the opposite 
side of the street.
• Within 20 feet of a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an 
intersec琀椀on.
• Within 50 feet of a tra昀케c signal or sign if your vehicle hides 
the signal or sign from view.
• Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad or light rail 
crossing.
• Within 7 1/2 feet of railroad or light rail tracks when it 
interferes with the train.
Emergency Parking
If your vehicle breaks down and you have no choice, you may 
temporarily stop or park in areas where it usually is not allowed, 
as long as the vehicle does not create a hazard. If you must stop 
or pull o昀昀 the road, turn on your hazard lights to warn other 
drivers.
If necessary, you may park a vehicle on the shoulder of a 
highway if passing tra昀케c has enough room to get by. If your 
vehicle cannot be seen from 200 feet in each direc琀椀on, you 
need to warn approaching tra昀케c. This can be done with 昀氀ags, 
昀氀ares, signs, signals or 昀氀aggers placed at least 200 feet from 
your vehicle in each direc琀椀on.
If you must leave your vehicle una琀琀ended, turn o昀昀 the engine, 
remove the key, set the brakes, and turn on your hazard lights.
If a police o昀케cer 昀椀nds a vehicle parked in an area where it is not 
allowed or it creates a hazard, the o昀케cer may have it removed 
and you will be responsible for towing and storage costs.

72 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
 Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. When you parallel park, you need to be no more than ___ 
inches away from the curb.
a. 12
b. 10
c. 8 
(page 68)
2. What is the safest way to re-enter tra昀케c from a parked 
posi琀椀on?
a. Yield to other tra昀케c a昀琀er you signal and check your blind 
spots and mirrors.
b. Signal, check your blind spots and pull into tra昀케c.
c. Check all your mirrors and signal; other tra昀케c will yield to 
you. 
(page 68)

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
73
Safe & Responsible 
Driving
The key to being a safe and responsible driver is to be aware 
of your surroundings at all 琀椀mes and to be alert for poten琀椀ally 
dangerous situa琀椀ons.
Defensive Driving
Know how to adjust your driving to allow for problems with 
your vehicle, the type of road surface, poor weather, heavy 
tra昀케c, poor ligh琀椀ng, and your own physical, mental, and 
emo琀椀onal condi琀椀on.
You must be able to see what is to the front, sides, and rear of 
your vehicle. Do not load or equip your vehicle in any way that 
blocks what you can see. Placing s琀椀ckers or other objects on 
your vehicle’s windows can limit your view of the road.
You will constantly make decisions every mile that you drive. 
A defensive driver is always aware of their surroundings and 
possible escape routes.
Safety Belts
Safety belt use is mandatory 
in Oregon for all drivers and 
passengers in all available 
sea琀椀ng posi琀椀ons. A properly 
worn safety belt reduces the 
chance of injury in a collision. 
Do not leave slack in the lap 
or shoulder por琀椀on of the belt. 
Never put the shoulder strap 
under your arm or behind your 
back.
JOIN  
THE CLICK.
Buckle up –
every trip, 
every time.
The Way to Go. 
Transportation Safety – ODOT

74 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Child passengers must be restrained in approved child safety 
seats un琀椀l they are 8 years of age or at least 4 feet 9 inches in 
height, and the adult lap and shoulder belt 昀椀ts them correctly. 
Infants must ride rear-facing un琀椀l they reach two years of age.
Communicating With Other Drivers
Collisions o昀琀en occur when one driver does not see another 
vehicle or a driver does something unexpected. You can let other 
drivers know what you plan to do or where you are by:
• Signaling before changing direc琀椀on or lanes.
• Using your brake lights to indicate you are slowing or 
stopping.
• Turning on your headlights.
• Using your horn as a reasonable warning.
• Using your hazard lights when needed.
Avoiding a Collision
There are three things you can do to avoid or minimize the 
impact of a collision—stopping quickly, turning quickly, and 
speeding up.
Stopping quickly: If you have enough distance to stop, apply 
the brakes. Be sure to read your vehicle owner’s manual on 
how to properly use your brakes.
Turning quickly: In most cases, you can turn the vehicle more 
quickly than you can stop it. Scanning the area ahead will help 
you iden琀椀fy poten琀椀al escape routes. If you will not stop in 琀椀me 
to avoid a collision, turn away from it.
Speeding up: Some琀椀mes it is best to speed up to avoid a 
collision. This may happen when another vehicle is about to hit 
you from the side or from behind and there is room ahead of you 
to get out of danger.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
75
Driving O昀昀 the Road
If you should drive o昀昀 the road, you need to know how to safely 
get back on it. The wrong reac琀椀on could result in a collision.
• Don’t panic or brake hard. Slow down un琀椀l you can get back 
on the road safely.
• Grip the steering wheel 昀椀rmly and keep your vehicle on a 
straight course.
• Turn the front wheels just enough to get you back on the 
road. Do not turn sharply or you might go across the road 
into oncoming tra昀케c.
Oncoming Tra昀케c
If an oncoming vehicle is dri昀琀ing into your lane, pull to the 
right as far as possible, slow down, and warn the other driver 
with your horn or lights. Never pull into the opposing lane; the 
oncoming driver may turn back sharply into that lane. In most 
cases, steering to the shoulder or ditch is safer than risking a 
head-on collision.
Animals
Animals can be unpredictable. Watch for signs warning of 
animal crossings and be prepared to brake or slow down as you 
pass an animal.
If you hit and injure a domes琀椀c animal, stop and make a 
reasonable e昀昀ort to check injuries. What you can do may 
depend on tra昀케c hazards or the animal’s behavior. Immediately 
report the injury to the animal’s owner. If you are unable to 
locate the owner you must report the incident to local law 
enforcement.
Stop your vehicle if a person riding on horseback or leading an 
animal raises a hand or it is obvious the animal is frightened, 
unless stopping would cause a collision. A raised hand means 
the animal is frightened. Do not use your horn or make other 
loud, sudden noises near the animal.

76 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Hazardous Conditions
Driving becomes hazardous when visibility is reduced or when 
the road surface is wet or covered with snow or ice. Hazardous 
condi琀椀ons require slower speeds and increased following 
distances.
Using Lights
Using headlights will help 
other drivers see you at all 
琀椀mes of the day. Headlights 
must be turned on from 
sunset to sunrise. Lights 
also must be on at any 琀椀me 
condi琀椀ons make it di昀케cult to 
see people or vehicles 1,000 
feet ahead.
If using your high beams, 
you must dim your lights 
when an oncoming vehicle 
is within 500 feet. Dim your 
lights when following another 
vehicle within 350 feet. 
Headlight glare in a rearview 
mirror can blind another 
driver. When you are required 
to dim your headlights, other auxiliary lights such as fog lights, 
must be o昀昀. These extra lights make it di昀케cult for oncoming 
drivers to see.
It is illegal to drive a vehicle at night or in bad weather with 
only the parking lights on. A vehicle stopped or parked on a 
road or shoulder must have parking lights on in limited visibility 
condi琀椀ons.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
77
Night Driving
At night, your reac琀椀on is slower because you can only see as 
far as your headlights. To adjust your driving habits accordingly, 
here are some night driving 琀椀ps:
• Look a li琀琀le to the right of oncoming lights and watch the 
road edge or fog line. This helps you be less blinded by 
headlight glare.
• Check your headlights, taillights, and turn signal lights o昀琀en 
to make sure they are working and lenses are clean.
• Be careful when passing at dawn or dusk. Oncoming vehicles 
may not have their headlights on, and you may not see it 
un琀椀l it is too late.
• Be alert for vulnerable road users, such as people riding 
bicycles and pedestrians, as they are harder to see.
Fog, Dust and Smoke
If you drive into fog, dust, smoke, or any area of low visibility, 
use headlights on low beam. Light from high beams will re昀氀ect 
back, causing glare, making it more di昀케cult to see ahead.
As visibility decreases, slow down. Be alert for slow or stopped 
vehicles and other obstacles. Be prepared to pull over and stop. 
If you choose to pull o昀昀 the road, pull as far as you can to the 
right and turn on your hazard lights.
Rain
Rain impairs your ability to see ahead and increases the braking 
distance needed to stop your vehicle. When roads are wet, 
apply the brakes sooner and more gently than usual. Even 
summer showers can cause slippery roads when rain mixes 
with oil and dirt.
Increase your visibility to other motorists by turning on your 
headlights when your windshield wipers are on. Do not use 
cruise control in wet condi琀椀ons. Keep windows clear of 
moisture.

78 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Vehicle 琀椀res some琀椀mes hydroplane (skim or 昀氀oat) over a wet 
road surface. The ability to steer and stop can be reduced or 
lost. Slow down when roads are wet.
If you drive through water and the brakes get wet, gently apply 
the brakes while driving slowly un琀椀l they begin to respond. It is 
best to do this as soon as you can a昀琀er driving through water.
Do not drive through 昀氀ooded areas. High water may cause loss 
of control or engine stalling.
Snow and Ice
Snow and ice also impair your ability to see ahead and increase 
the braking distance needed to stop your vehicle. Drive at 
slower speeds and leave more room between your vehicle and 
the vehicle ahead. Keep windows clear of snow, ice and fog, 
and do not use cruise control.
Pay a琀琀en琀椀on to weather forecasts and warnings. When police 
or highway o昀케cials say driving is very hazardous, stay o昀昀 the 
road. If you must drive on snow and ice, follow these 琀椀ps:
• Gently press on the gas pedal. Too much power may cause 
the 琀椀res to spin or the vehicle to slide.
• Gently press and release the brakes. If you slam on the 
brakes, your vehicle will likely skid.
• Get the “feel” of the road away from tra昀케c when you start 
driving. Try your brakes lightly so you will know what to expect.
• Make turns at a reduced, steady speed to avoid a skid.
• Watch for danger spots ahead. A bridge or shaded area 
freezes 昀椀rst and may be icy when the rest of the road is free 
of ice.
• When you go uphill on a snow or ice-covered road, apply 
just enough power to maintain mo琀椀on without causing the 
wheels to spin.
• Be aware that the road is likely to be the most slippery when 
the temperature is near the freezing point rather than below 
freezing.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
79
Skidding
Skids occur when the 琀椀res can no longer grip the road. Driving 
too fast for road condi琀椀ons causes skids. If your vehicle begins 
to skid:
• Stay o昀昀 the brakes. Un琀椀l the vehicle slows, your brakes will 
not be e昀昀ec琀椀ve.
• Steer in the direc琀椀on you want the vehicle to go. As soon as 
the vehicle begins to straighten out, turn the steering wheel 
back the other way. If you do not do this, your vehicle may 
swing around in the other direc琀椀on and you could start a 
new skid.
• Con琀椀nue to correct your steering, le昀琀 and right, un琀椀l the 
vehicle is again moving down the road under your control.
Chains and Trac琀椀on Tires
You may see signs that require you to carry or use chains or 
trac琀椀on 琀椀res.
“Chains” include link chains, cable chains or any other device 
that a琀琀aches to the wheel, vehicle, or outside of the 琀椀re, 
speci昀椀cally designed to increase trac琀椀on on snow and ice.
“Trac琀椀on 琀椀res” are studded 琀椀res, retractable 
studded 琀椀res or other 琀椀res that meet the 琀椀re 
industry de昀椀ni琀椀on as suitable for use in severe 
snow condi琀椀ons. Tires designated by the 琀椀re 
industry display a mountain/snow昀氀ake emblem 
on the 琀椀re sidewall like the illustra琀椀on to the right.
Studded 琀椀res are generally allowed only from November 1 
through March 31 in Oregon. Because of the damage caused by 
studded 琀椀res, drivers are encouraged to use alternates such as 
chains or other trac琀椀on 琀椀res.
Informa琀椀on on chain and trac琀椀on 琀椀re requirements is available 
from the ODOT website at TripCheck.com.

80 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Dangerous Driving Behaviors
Driving requires your full a琀琀en琀椀on. There are many distrac琀椀ons 
that may prevent you from focusing on driving. Your mental and 
emo琀椀onal state, as well as your physical health, a昀昀ects the way 
you drive. Your overall health, fa琀椀gue, and even emo琀椀ons, such 
as anger or worry, are a few of the condi琀椀ons that can make 
you an unsafe driver. If you 昀椀nd yourself just going through the 
mo琀椀ons of driving, without really being aware of what you are 
doing or what is happening around you, it is 琀椀me to stop for a 
rest or maybe quit for the day.
Distracted Driving
Being alert is an essen琀椀al part of safe driving. Pay close a琀琀en琀椀on 
to your surroundings, be aware and always on the lookout for 
other users of the road. Avoid the following distrac琀椀ons:
• It is illegal for drivers under 18 years of age to use a cell 
phone or other mobile electronic device while opera琀椀ng a 
vehicle. Turn it o昀昀 or put it in the back seat and ignore it.
• Drivers 18 years of age or older must use a hands-free 
accessory to use a cell phone or other mobile electronic 
device. The hands-free accessory must only require minimal 
use of a 昀椀nger to ac琀椀vate or deac琀椀vate the device. Consider 
assigning your passenger to be in charge of the device.
• It is illegal to have a TV, tablet or other video display visible 
to the driver.
• It is illegal to play a radio or other sound system so loud it 
can be heard 50 feet away from your vehicle. It is important 
to be able to hear horns, screeching 琀椀res and sirens.
• It is dangerous to do any ac琀椀vity that takes your eyes o昀昀 
the road while driving such as removing clothing, applying 
makeup, tex琀椀ng, reading, ea琀椀ng or drinking.
• Do not hold a person, pet, or package in your lap or arms.
• Do not take your eyes o昀昀 the road to turn around to deal 
with the needs of passengers, children or pets. If you must 
give a琀琀en琀椀on to passengers or animals, pull over to the side 
of the road and park your vehicle.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
81
Road Rage
Angry or aggressive behavior by other drivers is o昀琀en called 
“road rage.” These behaviors may include driving in an illegal, 
unsafe or threatening manner, shou琀椀ng and rude gestures. 
If you see an aggressive driver, stay out of the way. Do not 
challenge them by going faster or trying to out-drive them.
Fa琀椀gue and Drowsy Driving
A lot of yawning, head nodding, heavy eyelids, blurred vision 
and not staying in your lane while driving can mean you may be 
falling asleep at the wheel. When 琀椀red or sleepy, you are slower 
to react, and less aware of changing road and tra昀케c condi琀椀ons. 
Be sure you are well rested before and during travel. Take 
breaks to rest if you feel 琀椀red. 
Things that may help you stay awake:
• Never try to push through to your des琀椀na琀椀on. Find a safe 
place to stop and rest or take a brisk walk.
• Drink water. Dehydra琀椀on can cause fa琀椀gue.
• Talk with your passenger to stay alert.
• Take turns driving to allow each driver to rest.
• Beware of medicines that can make you drowsy.

82 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Health and Hearing
Your health can impact your ability to drive safely. If you are 
sick, think about if you really feel up to driving, especially 
on a long trip. Some medical condi琀椀ons may cause serious 
problems that impact safe driving. These can include 
confusion, decreased reac琀椀on 琀椀me, or an unexpected loss 
of consciousness. Talk to your doctor about the e昀昀ects your 
condi琀椀on may have on driving.
Being able to hear is important when driving. A change in 
the sound coming from your 琀椀res warns you of road surface 
changes. A di昀昀erence in the sound of your engine may warn 
you of a problem. Sound also can tell you when another vehicle 
may be in your blind spot. It is important to be able to hear an 
approaching emergency vehicle. Do not use headphones that 
may reduce your hearing.
Impaired Driving
Never get behind the wheel a昀琀er drinking alcohol or using other 
drugs. The chances of being in a collision go up for drivers who 
have used alcohol and/or drugs. This can lead to serious injuries 
or death. Leave the driving to someone else if you have used 
drugs of any kind.
Alcohol and drugs a昀昀ect your mental and 
physical abili琀椀es. If you drive while alcohol or 
drugs are a昀昀ec琀椀ng you, you could be arrested 
for DUII. If your blood alcohol concentra琀椀on is 
0.08% or more, Oregon law presumes you are 
impaired, but you can s琀椀ll be arrested even if 
your BAC is lower than 0.08%.
Alcohol is the most common drug involved when drivers are 
impaired, but marijuana impairment has also contributed to 
many collisions in Oregon. The use of alcohol and marijuana 
together can reduce a person’s ability to drive safely. The safest 
choice is to not drive a昀琀er using any drug that a昀昀ects your 
reac琀椀on 琀椀me or physical abili琀椀es.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
83
Over the counter and prescrip琀椀on medica琀椀ons can also impair 
your driving ability. Ask your doctor or pharmacist about the 
side e昀昀ects of any medica琀椀on. If you are not sure if it is safe to 
drive a昀琀er taking a new medica琀椀on, it is best to 昀椀nd di昀昀erent 
transporta琀椀on. Oregon’s DUII law applies to any substance that 
impairs your mental or physical ability to drive. 
Oregon’s Implied Consent law means that by driving a motor 
vehicle, you have agreed that you will take a breath, blood, or 
urine test when asked by a police o昀케cer. If you refuse to take 
a test, you may receive a 昀椀ne, and/or your driving privileges 
could be suspended. 
• If you are under 21, you will fail the test if you have a blood 
alcohol concentra琀椀on of any amount. Oregon has a zero 
tolerance law.
• If you are 21 or over, you will fail the test if your blood 
alcohol concentra琀椀on is 0.08 percent or more.
Oregon’s Open Container law says it is illegal to have an open 
bo琀琀le or other container with alcohol in it while you are in a 
vehicle on any road. A container is considered to be open if its 
seal is broken, even if it has been reclosed. Any open bo琀琀les or 
containers should be in the trunk.

84 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
External Passengers
Anyone, regardless of age, should not ride in a pickup bed or on 
any external part of the vehicle. Oregon law prohibits anyone 
under 18 years of age from riding on the hood, fender, running 
board, or other external part of a vehicle, including a pickup bed.
You cannot carry a dog on an external part of a vehicle, including 
a pickup bed, unless the dog is protected by a framework, 
carrier, or other device to keep it from falling from the vehicle. 
Do not hold an animal in your lap or arms when driving.
Vehicle Equipment Failures
Most equipment failures can be avoided with good maintenance. 
An unmaintained vehicle can become unsafe to drive. Check 
your vehicle owner’s manual for maintenance informa琀椀on.
There may be 琀椀mes when equipment fails, resul琀椀ng in a driving 
emergency that calls for you to take fast ac琀椀on.
Blowouts
If a front 琀椀re blows, steering will be di昀케cult and there may be 
a strong pull to the side. A rear blowout causes the back of the 
vehicle to weave or sway. If you have a blowout:
• Grip the steering wheel 昀椀rmly.
• Slow down gradually.
• Pull o昀昀 the road.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
85
Brakes Fail
If your brakes stop working:
• Pump the brakes. This may build up enough pressure to get 
them working again.
• Shi昀琀 to a lower gear so the engine can help slow you down.
• Slowly apply the parking brake.
• Use your horn or lights to warn others that you are out of control.
• Once you have slowed, ease onto the shoulder.
Headlights Go Out
If your headlights stop working:
• Turn the headlight switch o昀昀 and on.
• Try other lights such as high beams, driving lights or hazard 
lights. This may give you enough light to guide you o昀昀 the road.
• Slow down and ease onto the shoulder.
Power Steering Fails
If your power steering stops working:
• Grip the steering wheel 昀椀rmly. Steering will be di昀케cult.
• Slow down and ease onto the shoulder.
Accelerator S琀椀cks
If your accelerator s琀椀cks:
• Search for an escape path.
• Shi昀琀 the vehicle to neutral. Use an open palm to avoid 
shi昀琀ing into another gear.
• Steer smoothly while braking.
• Pull o昀昀 the road when it is safe to do so.

86 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Fuel Saving Techniques
Improve gas mileage or save fuel by using these techniques:
• Drive steadily and avoid exceeding posted speed limits.
• Avoid rapid starts and sudden stops.
• Avoid unnecessary idling.
• Combine errands into a single trip.
• Properly maintain your vehicle.
For more helpful 琀椀ps go to:
www.fueleconomy.gov 
www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/discover-fuel-saving-琀椀ps

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
87
Sample Test Ques琀椀ons
1. It is illegal to have fog lights on when you are
a. required to dim your headlights.
b. using them to see through fog.
c. using your high beam headlights. 
(page 76)
2. A driver has three tools to use to avoid a collision.
a. Slow down, check your mirrors, stop.
b. Stop quickly, turn quickly, speed up.
c. Speed up, honk your horn, change lanes. 
(page 74)
3. Oregon’s Open Container law
a. does not apply to anyone over the age of 21.
b. requires any open bo琀琀les or containers to be in the trunk.
c. allows only passengers to have open containers. 
(page 83)
4. You are driving and receive a text on your cell phone. What 
do you do?
a. Read and respond to the text.
b. Ignore the text un琀椀l you stop in a safe parking area.
c. Slow down and read and respond while keeping one eye 
on the road. 
(page 80)

88 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual3
Other Important 
Informa琀椀on
Additional details about any of the topics in this 
section are available at OregonDMV.com.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
89
A Class C non-commercial driving privilege allows you to drive 
a vehicle (passenger car, moped, autocycle, van, or pickup) of 
not more than 26,000 pounds that is exempt from commercial 
driver license (CDL) or motorcycle endorsement requirements.
How to Apply
To qualify for a Class C non-commercial driving privilege you must:
• Be at least 15 years of age to apply for an instruc琀椀on permit.
• Be at least 16 years of age to apply for a license.
• Complete an electronic applica琀椀on. If you are under 18 
years of age, your parent or legal guardian will need to sign 
the electronic applica琀椀on. If your parent or legal guardian is 
unable to come with you to DMV, you will need to submit 
form 735-173DP with your parent or legal guardian’s 
signature. If emancipated or married, you must provide proof 
and then a parent or legal guardian signature is not required.
• Present proof of iden琀椀ty, date of birth, and residence 
address.
• Provide your Social Security Number (SSN) or electronically 
cer琀椀fy that you do not have a SSN.
• If you are under 18 years of age and applying for a 昀椀rst-琀椀me 
Oregon driving privilege, a parent or legal guardian must 
cer琀椀fy that you are enrolled or a琀琀ending school. If you are 
no longer in school, you must present a high school diploma 
or General Educa琀椀on Development (GED) cer琀椀昀椀cate.
• Successfully complete required knowledge, vision, and drive 
tests.
• Pay applicable fees.
• Have your photo taken. Hats, glasses, paint or other 
temporary substances on your face, or contact lenses that 
change the appearance of the eye are not allowed.
• Not be suspended, revoked or canceled in Oregon or any 
other state.
• Surrender any other driving privilege or ID card.

90 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
• If you are under 18 years of age and applying for a driver 
license:
 » You must have had an instruc琀椀on permit for at least 
6 months. Holding an out-of-state permit does count 
towards this requirement.
 » You must have 100 hours of supervised driving experience 
or 50 hours of supervised driving experience and have 
taken an ODOT-approved tra昀케c safety educa琀椀on 
course. DMV  must receive proof of course comple琀椀on. 
Your driving experience only counts if supervised by 
someone at least 21 years of age who has had valid driving 
privileges for at least 3 years.
Proof of Iden琀椀ty and Date of Birth
You are required to present acceptable proof of iden琀椀ty and 
date of birth. Documents presented as proof must be original or 
cer琀椀昀椀ed copies from the issuing agency.
The most common forms of proof include:
• U.S. government-issued birth cer琀椀昀椀cate (hospital-issued 
birth cer琀椀昀椀cates and bap琀椀smal records are not acceptable).
• U.S. passport or passport card, valid or expired no more than 
5 years.
• Tribal ID card from a federally recognized tribe located in 
Oregon, approved by DMV.
• Cer琀椀昀椀cate of Naturaliza琀椀on or Cer琀椀昀椀cate of Ci琀椀zenship.
• Employment Authoriza琀椀on Card, valid or expired no more 
than 5 years (I-766). 
• Permanent Resident Card, valid or expired no more than 5 
years (I-551). 
• Foreign passport, valid or expired no more than 5 years. 
• Re-entry Permit, valid or expired no more than 5 years (I-
327). 
• Refugee Travel Document, valid or expired no more than 5 
years (I-571). 

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
91
• Consulate Card, valid or expired no more than 5 years. 
• Oregon driver license, permit or ID card, valid or expired no 
more than 13 years. 
• Out-of-State driver license, permit or ID card, valid or 
expired no more than 1 year.
If your current legal name is di昀昀erent than the name shown on 
your iden琀椀ty document, you will be required to provide proof of 
legal name change. 
Proof of Current Residence Address 
You must present one document to prove your address when 
applying for a driving privilege. Common proof includes:
• Cer琀椀昀椀ca琀椀on by a person who resides at the same address as 
you. The individual must accompany you and provide proof 
of the address such as their license or ID card.
• Mail from a business, school or government agency 
containing your 昀椀rst and last name. Personal mail and 
forwarded mail is not acceptable.
• A document from an educa琀椀onal provider.
• A u琀椀lity hookup order, bill, mortgage document, or property 
tax statement.
For a complete list of acceptable documents to prove iden琀椀ty, 
date of birth, legal name change or residence address, visit 
OregonDMV.com.
For REAL ID addi琀椀onal requirements and informa琀椀on, please 
visit Oregon.gov/REALID.

92 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
Additional Services
Organ, Eye, and Tissue Dona琀椀on
When issued your driving privilege, you can sign up on the 
organ, eye, and 琀椀ssue donor registry. DMV will add a “♥” to the 
front of the card, with the words “Anatomical Donor” to the 
back of your license or permit.
For addi琀椀onal informa琀椀on or to sign up to be a donor, go to 
donatelifenw.org or call (800) 452-1369.
Veteran Designa琀椀on
If you are a veteran, you may request a veteran designa琀椀on 
on your license or permit. You must present a Cer琀椀昀椀ca琀椀on 
of Release or Discharge from Ac琀椀ve Duty (Form DD214) 
or a Correc琀椀on to DD214 (Form DD215) showing you were 
discharged under honorable condi琀椀ons as proof that you are a 
veteran.
Deaf or Hard of Hearing Designa琀椀on
You may request that DMV add a deaf or hard of hearing 
designa琀椀on on your license or permit.  No proof is required. This 
designa琀椀on will also be visible to law enforcement through your 
DMV record.
DMV will add a  
to the front of the card, with the words 
"Deaf or hard of hearing" to the back of your license or permit.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
93
Mandatory Insurance
Oregon law requires every driver to insure their vehicles by at 
least these minimum amounts:
• Bodily Injury and Property Damage: $25,000 per collision 
for one person; $50,000 per collision for bodily injury to or 
death of two or more persons; and $20,000 per collision for 
damage to the property of others.
• Personal Injury Protec琀椀on: $15,000 per person for 
reasonable and necessary expenses within two years a昀琀er 
the date of the person's injury. Expenses may be for medical, 
dental, and other services needed due to injury or death 
resul琀椀ng from the use, occupancy, or maintenance of the 
vehicle. 
• Uninsured Motorist Coverage: $25,000 per person; $50,000 
per collision for bodily injury.
Trafﬁc Collisions
The common term for collisions, wrecks, and crashes is 
“accidents.” However, the word “accident” is misleading. If you 
are involved in a collision with another vehicle or object because 
you were distracted, 琀椀red, or not driving defensively, it is a 
preventable collision—not an accident.
Your Responsibili琀椀es
If you are involved in a collision, you must:
• Stop. If there are no injuries and vehicles can be safely 
moved, move them out of travel lanes as soon as possible. 
Informa琀椀on can be exchanged away from the scene of the 
collision.
• Give reasonable assistance to injured persons. Injured 
people should never be moved carelessly.

94 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
• Exchange informa琀椀on. Provide your name, address, driver 
license number, license plate number of your vehicle, and 
your insurance informa琀椀on to the other driver, passengers, 
or any injured pedestrian involved. If a person is killed or 
unconscious, remain at the scene of the collision un琀椀l police 
arrive.
• File a collision report within 72 hours, Form 735-32, if:
 »
Damage to the vehicle you were driving is over $2,500;
 »
Damage to property other than a vehicle is over $2,500;
 »
Damage to any vehicle is greater than $2,500 and any 
vehicle is towed from the scene due to damage from the 
collision;
 » There is injury or death resul琀椀ng from the collision;
 » You are the owner of a vehicle involved in a reportable 
collision and the driver fails to report the collision.
A police report does not replace your requirement to 昀椀le a 
report with DMV.
Una琀琀ended Vehicles
If you hit an unoccupied vehicle, try to 昀椀nd the owner. If you 
cannot 昀椀nd the owner, leave a note with your name and address, 
along with a brief descrip琀椀on of what happened. If you damage 
property other than a motor vehicle, you must also try to 昀椀nd 
the owner or someone in charge of the property to no琀椀fy them 
of the damage.

2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual 
| 
95
Loss of Driving Privileges
In order to keep your driving privilege, you must maintain a 
good driving record. Some of the reasons you can lose your 
driving privilege are:
• Driving under the in昀氀uence of alcohol, drugs or inhalants.
• Failing to report a vehicle collision.
• Driving uninsured.
• Too many tra昀케c convic琀椀ons (Driver Improvement Program).
• Failure to comply with court 昀椀nes.
This is not a complete list. For addi琀椀onal informa琀椀on on 
suspensions and reinstatements, go to OregonDMV.com.

96 
| 
2026-2027 Oregon Driver Manual
HUMAN TRAFFICKING IS AN EVERYWHERE PROBLEM ...
WITH AN EVERYBODY SOLUTION
Human tra昀케cking is modern-day slavery. It occurs in all 50 states in the U.S., in 
both rural and urban settings, when people are subject to forced labor or ille-
gally bought and sold for commercial sex. A minor being sold for sex is always a 
victim of human tra昀케cking.
While the recruitment or purchase of victims may occur online, survivors may 
be recovered in many locations, including truck stops, bus terminals, local 
businesses, restaurants, hotels, strip clubs, private homes, a variety of events, 
etc. The movement of victims may include the use of rideshares, taxis or other 
modes of transportation.
As a licensed driver, you may  
intersect with a human tra昀케cking 
situation while you’re en route some-
where, stopped at a business or in a 
neighborhood or attending a sporting 
or other event where a large number 
of people are gathered.
EVERYDAY HEROES NEEDED.
If you suspect someone could be a victim of human tra昀케cking, time is of  
the essence.
1) If you’re seeing a crime in progress, call 911. When reporting a tip, provide 
“actionable information,” including times, dates, location and  address of the 
situation, descriptions of cars or trucks involved (make, model, color, license 
plate, distinguishing marks and/or USDOT number, etc.) and people (height, 
weight, hair color, eye color, age, etc.). Take a picture if you can. When you  
contact law enforcement, tell them you suspect human tra昀케cking.
2) To access the national human tra昀케cking hotlines to ascertain if you’re  
witnessing human tra昀케cking, to access services, make a report or share  
incidents that have been reported to law enforcement, call 1-888-3737-888 
 in the U.S., 1-833-900-1010 in Canada or 01800-5533-000 in Mexico.
3) Please do not approach tra昀케ckers. Allow law enforcement to deal with  
tra昀케ckers and recover victims. Approaching tra昀케ckers is not only dangerous 
for you and their victims but could lead to problems in the eventual prosecu-
tion of tra昀케ckers. If you do interact with a human tra昀케cking victim, provide 
support based on your comfort level.
For red 昀氀ag indicators of human
tra昀케cking and more information,
download the TAT app today.

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Important Contact 
Informa琀椀on
Contact DMV
DMV Website ............................................................OregonDMV.com
DMV outside the Portland area ................................503-945-5000 
within the Portland area .............................................503-299-9999
TDD (deaf and hard of hearing).......................Statewide Relay 711
Report Drunk Drivers ...................................................................... 911 
Road Informa琀椀on .......................................................... TripCheck.com
Vital Records — 
Oregon (Birth Cer琀椀昀椀cate Informa琀椀on) ....................971-673-1190
Send your comments regarding the contents of this manual to: 
Driver Programs 
DMV 
1905 Lana Avenue NE 
Salem, Oregon 97314
ODOT does not discriminate regarding access to our programs, services, ac琀椀vi琀椀es, hiring, and 
employment prac琀椀ces.
To report concerns and complaints related to discrimina琀椀on, contact ODOT's 
Nondiscrimina琀椀on team: 
www.oregon.gov/odot/Business/OCR/Pages/Civil-Rights-Concerns.aspx 
ODOT.TitleVI@odot.oregon.gov 
855-540-6655
ODOT complies with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act and other federal nondiscrimina琀椀on 
statutes. Assistance is provided to anyone who requests it.
This informa琀椀on can be made available in an alterna琀椀ve format by contac琀椀ng a local DMV o昀케ce.

D R I V E R  A N D  M O T O R  V E H I C L E  S E R V I C E S
Drive Safely and Courteously.
It Could Save a Life!
This Message is Brought 
to You by Your Local DMV Oﬀice
Form 735-37 (1-26)©
 STK #300011
