Revised August 2025
Driver Guide
Driver Guide
A guide to understanding 
Missouri Motor Vehicle Laws 
and Licensing Requirements
Missouri


Chapter 1  —	 The Missouri Driver License. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 3
Chapter 2  —	 The Driver Examination. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 18
Chapter 3  —	 Rules of the Road. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 22
Chapter 4  —	 Sharing the Road. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 28
Chapter 5  —	 Parking. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 35
Chapter 6  —	 Highway Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 37
Chapter 7  —	 Pavement Markings, Traffic Signs, and 
	
	 Signals . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 42
Chapter 8  —	 Safe Driving Tips For Everyday Driving . .  .  .  .  .  Page 55
Chapter 9 — 	 Safe Driving Tips For Special
	
	 	 Driving Conditions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 62
Chapter 10 —	 Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 67
Chapter 11 —	 The Point System. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 73
Chapter 12 —	 Vehicle Titling and Registration. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 75
Chapter 13 —	 Mandatory Insurance. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 79
Chapter 14 —	 Safety and Emissions Inspections
	
& Required Equipment. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 83
Chapter 15 —	 Commercial Vehicles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 87
Chapter 16  —	Districted Driving and 
	
	 	 Electronic Communication Devices . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 92
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 94
Contact Information . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Page 98
Note: The state motor vehicle laws described in this manual are not 
reproduced in their entirety and the wording is not identical. Due to possible 
federal and state law changes and Department of Revenue (Department) 
policy, the information in this manual may not always be current. The 
Department will make every effort to incorporate any changes as soon as 
possible. Please visit our website for the most current version.
The Missouri Driver Guide is published by the Missouri Department of Revenue. 
1
Table of Contents

Carefully studying the Missouri Driver Guide will increase your driving 
confidence and broaden your knowledge of Missouri traffic laws.  The 
more knowledge you have, the safer you are!
To test your knowledge of traffic laws, you will need to take a written test 
of 25 multiple-choice questions. Studying this guide will prepare you for that 
test. You must correctly answer 20 questions to pass the test. All of the test 
questions come directly from information found in this guide. There are no 
“trick” questions.
To test your ability to drive a vehicle, you must take a driving skills test.  
Your examiner realizes a driving test will probably be an unusual experience 
for you, and you might even become nervous or uneasy. If you do become 
nervous or fearful, please remember your examiner has accompanied many 
other people exactly like you, and the examiner rides with you only to make 
sure you can control your vehicle and observe the rules of safety. Your 
examiner will not try to trick you in any way. Remember that thousands of 
people pass this test every year and become licensed drivers. If they can do 
it, so can you! Just relax and do the best you can.
We would like to hear your comments and questions about the material 
included in this manual:
Address:	
Driver License Bureau
	
P.O. Box 200
	
Jefferson City, MO  65105-0200
Telephone:	
(573) 526-2407
Fax:	
(573) 522-8174
E-Mail:	
dlbmail@dor. mo. gov
Website:	
http://dor. mo. gov/
The names and telephone numbers of other related agencies and offices 
are located on the last page of this guide.
The Missouri Commercial Driver License Manual and Motorcycle Operator
Manual are posted on our website at http://dor. mo. gov/. You may also 
request a copy from the Missouri State Highway Patrol (MSHP), or any 
Motor Vehicle and Driver Licensing Office (license office). 
2

Anyone who operates a motor vehicle or motor-driven cycle on public 
roadways in Missouri is required to have a valid driver license. You may 
obtain a Missouri driver license at any Missouri license office.
You must have a Missouri driver license if:
•  	You live in Missouri, are 16 years of age or older, and plan to drive.
•  	You are a new resident of Missouri and want to drive, even if you have a 	
	driver license from another state.
•  	You are an out-of-state commercial driver who has moved to Missouri 	
	
within the last 30 days. (Please refer to the Missouri Commercial Driver 	
	
License Manual.)
You do not need a Missouri driver license if:
•   You are a member of the armed forces and you have a valid driver 
license from your home state.
•   You are a full-time student and you have a valid driver license from your 
home state.
•   You operate or temporarily operate or move any farm tractor or
implement on a highway for agri-related purposes.
You are required to carry your driver license or permit when you drive. If any
law enforcement officer asks to see your driver license or permit, you must 
present it. It is against the law for you to allow anyone else to use your 
license or permit.
Tip! Anyone obtaining a new license or permit is required to show
verification of lawful status, identity (full legal name), social security number, 
and Missouri residency. These requirements are explained in detail later in 
this chapter.
Types of Permits
If you are under 21 years of age, you will be issued a permit identifying you 
as a minor.
Instruction Permit — Eligible Age: 15
This is the first step in Missouri’s Graduated Driver License Program for 
young drivers. Generally, this permit allows a young person to learn to drive 
with the supervision of a licensed adult. See later in this chapter for detailed 
information.
IMPORTANT NOTE: The driver examination record issued by the Missouri 
State Highway Patrol is not valid as a permit or license. The test results will 
be electronically submitted to the Department of Revenue.Take your copy 
of the driver examination record and other required verification documents 
to your local license office to apply for the actual permit or license to meet 
GDL and legal operator requirements. The six-month permit period required 
for intermediate license does not start until the issuance of the temporary 
instruction permit.
Motorcycle Instruction Permit — Eligible Age: 15½ or 16
You may apply for a motorcycle instruction permit to learn to operate a 
motorcycle or motortricycle. The age you are eligible to apply may be 15½ 
or 16 years, as described below.
3
Chapter 1 - The Missouri Driver License

•	 15½ years of age (15 years and 182 days)
	
The Motorcycle Instruction Permit will only be issued if you have 	
	
	
successfully completed an approved motorcycle rider training course. 	
	
You must pass the Class F and Class M written, vision, and road sign 	
	
tests. You must also have the written consent of your parent or legal
	
guardian. This permit allows daylight driving only, within a 50-mile radius 	
	
of home, a motorcycle of no larger than 250 cc, and no passengers.
•  	 16 years of age or older
	 If you are 16 years old or older you may apply for a motorcycle instruction 	
	 permit, but the motorcycle rider training course is not required. If you do 	
	 not have a valid driver license, you must take the Class F and Class M 	
	 written tests to receive a motorcycle instruction permit. 
When you are ready, you may take the motorcycle driving test and pay the 
appropriate fee to become motorcycle qualified.
For more information about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle 
Operator Manual posted on our website at dor. mo. gov/. You may also 
request a copy from MSHP or any license office.  
Types of Licenses
If you are under 21 years of age, you will be issued a license identifying you 
as a minor. When you reach age 21, you may apply and pay for another 
driver license (without the minor indication) or wait until your under-21 
license expires.
Intermediate License (Class F) — Eligible Age: 16
This is the second step in Missouri’s Graduated Driver License (GDL) program 
for young drivers. Generally, this license allows a young person certain 
restricted driving privileges. See later in this chapter for detailed information.
Full Driver License (Class F) — Eligible Age: 18
This is the basic driver license, also called an operator license. You must 
have a Class F license to operate any motor vehicle (other than one requiring 
you to have a Class A, B, C, or E license.) The Class F license does not 
allow you to drive a motorcycle unless the license shows the Motorcycle 
(M) endorsement. Endorsements will be discussed later in this chapter. You 
must pass the Class F written, vision, road sign, and driving tests.
For-Hire License (Class E) — Eligible Age: 18
When you test for a Class E license, the written exam will include questions 
based on the complete driver guide, but mainly Chapter 15 (Commercial 
Vehicles). You must also pass the vision and road sign tests. If you already 
have a Class F license, a driving test is not required. However, you must still 
meet the “under 21 requirements” (see page 18) for a full license if you apply 
for a Class E license at age 18. There are a number of reasons you may 
wish to obtain a Class E license, such as:
• 	 If you receive pay for driving a motor vehicle transporting 14 or fewer 	
	
passengers (such as a driver for a day care center).
•	 If you will transport property for pay or as part of your job (such as a florist 
delivery driver).
•	 If you regularly operate a motor vehicle for your employment which belongs 	
	
to another person and is designed to carry freight and merchandise. The 	
	
vehicle must be 26,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) 	
	
and not required to be placarded for hazardous materials.
4

The following individuals shall not be required to obtain a for-hire (Class E) 
license pursuant to 387. 438 RSMo:
•	 Individuals who use a motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight less than or 	
	
equal to 12,000 pounds for the purpose of providing transportation services as
	
an eligible Transportation Network Company driver or taxicab driver; or
•	 Individuals providing prepared food delivery services for entities such as 	
	
a fast food restaurant, delicatessen, or other facility engaged in the selling 	
	
of food for consumption off the premises of the facility.
Motorcycle License (Class M) — Eligible Age: 16
You must have a Class M license or permit (or a driver license with the 
M endorsement) if you operate a motorcycle or motortricycle on public 
roadways. You will need to pass the Class F and Class M written, vision, 
road sign, and motorcycle skills tests. GDL requirements will apply to 
Class M license applicants between the ages of 16 and 18. See the GDL 
requirements later in this chapter. A driver operating a motorized bicycle is 
not required to obtain a motorcycle endorsement, however he or she must 
hold, a valid operator’s (or higher classification) license.  
For more information about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle 
Operator Manual posted on our website at dor. mo. gov/. You may also 
request a copy from MSHP or any license office. 
Commercial Driver License (Class A, B, or C) 
You must have a commercial driver license based on the type of commercial 
motor vehicle you drive. You must be at least 18 years old to apply for a 
CDL, and at least 21 years old to obtain a CDL with a Hazardous Materials
or School Bus endorsement. You must still meet the “under 21” requirements 
if you apply for a CDL at age 18.
For more information about Missouri’s commercial driving laws, see the 
Commercial Driver License Manual posted on our website at dor. mo. gov/. 
You may also request a copy from MSHP or any license office. 
Nondriver Identification Card (Class ND)
You may obtain a photo nondriver ID for identification purposes. Your 
nondriver ID expires on your date of birth in the sixth year after you apply. 
If you are age 70 or older, your nondriver ID will be issued as non-expiring. 
Exception: Nondriver ID applicants age 70 or older may be issued a six year 
expiration date if applying for a REAL ID-compliant card or a lesser period 
based on immigration document status review.
Requirements to Obtain a License or Permit
Depending on your age, whether you are obtaining a new license or permit,
if you are renewing one, or if you have just moved to Missouri, the 
requirements to obtain a license are slightly different.
•	 If you are a driver age 15 to 21, the GDL program applies to you. Please
	
see the GDL section in this chapter for more information. You will need
	
to show verification of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name
	
and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, and 	
	
Missouri residency (detailed in this chapter) to qualify.
•  	If you are a Missouri driver, you may be required to provide verification 
	of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth), 	
	social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri residency
	will be required each time you apply to renew a driver license, nondriver 	
	ID, or instruction permit. You must also present your previous license. 
5

6
•	 If you are obtaining a new Missouri license, you must show verification of
	
lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth), social 	
	
security number, a name change if applicable, and Missouri residency. 
	
You will be required to take the four-part driver examination. The four-part 
	
exam consists of a written test, vision test, road sign test, and a driving 
	
skills test. (See Chapter 2 for more information.)
•	 If you are new to Missouri and are transferring your out-of-state driver
license, you will need to present verification of lawful status, identity (must 
include full legal name and date of birth), social security number, name 
change if applicable, Missouri residency, and mailing address, if different 
than residential address. You must also surrender the license from your 
previous state of residence, and take the vision and road sign tests. Upon 
transfer of your out-of-state driver license, any driver license, permit or 
nondriver ID issued in another state will be invalidated. 
•  	You must take the four-part driver examination (detailed in Chapter 2) if 	
	any of the following apply to you:
	
○You are applying for a new Missouri driver license. 
	
○Your Missouri driver license has been expired for more than six 
months (184 days).
	
○Your out-of-state license has been expired for more than 184 days.
	
○Your license was revoked because you have too many points (see 
Chapter 11) on your driving record or because of an Administrative 
Alcohol Revocation (see Chapter 10).
	
○The Director of Revenue asks you to take the exam, even if you have 
a current driver license.
Required Documents
When you obtain or renew any license, permit, or nondriver ID, you will be 
required to present proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal 
name and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, 
Missouri residency, and mailing address, if different than residential address. 
You will also be required to present and surrender your current license, 
permit, or nondriver ID. Details of these requirements are listed below. For 
more information, visit dor. mo. gov/.
• Lawful Status: A U.S. citizen may show a U.S. Birth Certificate (certified 
	
with an embossed, stamped or raised seal and issued by a vital records 	
	
agency. Hospital birth certificates and birth registration cards are not 	
	
acceptable.), a valid, unexpired U.S. passport a U.S. Certificate of
	
Citizenship, Certificate of Naturalization, or a Certificate of Birth Abroad. 	
	
A “copy” of a U.S. Birth Certificate (issued by a vital records agency 		
	
accompanied by a U.S. Military Identification Card or Discharge Papers. 	
	
This proof of lawful status is not acceptable for issuance of a REAL 	 	
	
ID-compliant document. Non-U.S. citizens must present the appropriate 
	
immigration documents indicating the applicant’s status. Examine the 	
	
full list of acceptable required documents to obtain a REAL ID-compliant 	
	
or non REAL ID-compliant card at
	
dor. mo. gov/drivers/idrequirements. php.
Age 65 and Older Exemption — If you are renewing a non REAL ID-compliant 
non-commercial permit or driver license or nondriver ID and are age 65 or older 
you may be exempt from presenting documents for place of birth.
•  	Identity: Documents used for verify identity must contain your full 
	legal name and date of birth. Many lawful status documents also prove 

7
	identity, other examples include: Employment Authorization Document, 
	REAL ID-Compliant or non-REAL ID License, or a Foreign Passport with 	
	a U.S. Visa accompanied by an I-94.
•  	Missouri Residency: You have a variety of options to prove your current 	
	address. Examples include any two current utility bills (including phone, 	
	electric, gas, water, sewer, and cable), property tax receipt, voter ID card, 	
	or any official letter issued within the last 90 days by another state, local 	
	governmental or another federal agency agency on its letterhead. To obtain 	
	a REAL ID-compliant document, you must provide two documents verifying 	
	Missouri residency. To obtain a non REAL ID-compliant document, you 	
	must provide one document verifying Missouri residency. If you have a 	
 separate mailing address, you must provide a document to verify the 	 	
	mailing address. 
	Note: A Post Office Box is not acceptable as a residential address. You 	
	need to show proof of residential address and alternate mailing address 	
	(if applicable.) Current addresses are important! Your license will be 	
	mailed to the address provided.  
	
○
If you are under the age of 21, and cannot provide an acceptable 	
	
	
	
document from the list for verification of a Missouri residential address, 
	
	
a parent or legal guardian may provide such a document on your behalf.
	
	
Refer to the complete list of acceptable documents at dor. mo. gov. For 	
	
	
purposes of an application for a REAL ID-compliant document, the use 	
	
	
of the document submitted by the parent of guardian, is only acceptable 	
	
	
as one of the two required residency verification documents. 
	
Residential address is the location at which a person has been 	
	
physically present, and that the person regards as home. A
	
residential address is a person’s true, fixed, principal, and 
	
permanent home, to which a person intends to return and remain, 	
	
even though currently residing elsewhere.
•	 Social Security Number
	
State law requires you to include your Social Security Number (SSN) on 
	
your application to obtain a Missouri License or permit. The SSN may be 
	
provided by presenting the Social Security Card, (must be original, signed 	
	
and not laminated) W-2 Wage and Tax Statement, 1099 Form, or a Paystub 	
	
with Name and Social Security Number. Current valid Missouri driver license, 	
	
nondriver ID or permit applicants who have previously verified their SSN, 		
	
may be eligible to provide their number verbally for verification purposes.
	
If you do not have a social security number:
	
○
You must present a letter from the Social Security Administration 
	
(SSA) regarding the status of your social security number. 	
	
	
Applicants without a social security number may be ineligible 		
	
for a REAL ID-compliant document depending upon lawful status 	
	
verification documents.
	
	
NOTE: If you are a nonimmigrant foreign student, who is not
	
	
authorized to work in the United States, submission of a status
	
	
letter from the SSA is not required. (You or your dependents
	
	
immigration document MUST reflect an F or a J classification.)
	
○
License or permit applications without a social security number  	
	
may be reviewed by the central office for final approval prior to
	
printing and mailing.

Permit Fees
Fees for and duration of a permit are based on the applicant’s age at the time of the 
transaction. Commercial learner’s permit knowledge test fees are not included.
License Fees
Fees and duration of license are based on the applicant’s age at the time of the 
transaction. Commercial Driver License (CDL) knowledge and skills test fees are 
not included.
*Based on the applicant’s age or document verification status at the time of the transaction.
•  Name Changes - If your current name is different than it appears on 
	 your identity and lawful status document presented, or is not the same 
	 on all your documents, present one of the documents below showing 		
	 your correct current name.	
•  Last Name Change - certified marriage license, certified divorce
	 decree, certified court order, certified court ordered adoption papers, or
	 amended birth certificate.
•  First Name Change - Certified court order.
•  Middle Name Change - Certified court order. 
Tip! Make sure you have all the necessary documents with you before you go 
to your license office. It will save you time and the time of your fellow customers!
New / Renewal License 
	
Type	
Minimum Age	
Cost	
Valid For...
Intermediate License	
16	
$14.00	
0–2 years
Full License 	
	
$16.50	
0–3 years*
(Class F)	
18	
or	
or
	
	
$33.00	
0–6 years*
For-Hire License	
	
$24.00	
0–3 years*(Class E)	
18	
or	
or
	
	
$48.00	
0–6 years*
	
	
	
0–2 years
Commercial	
	
$29.00	
0–3 years*
Driver License	
18	
or	
or
(Class A, B, or C)	
	
$58.00	
0–6 years*
	
	
	
0–2 years	
	
	
	

Motorcycle	
	
$16.50	
0–3 years*
Only License	
16	
or	
or
(Class M)	
	
$33.00	
0–6 years
Nondriver ID Card	
any age	
$24.00	
 0–6 years*
	
	
	
or Non-Expiring
Nondriver ID Card	
17½	
$0.00	
0–6 years*
(Voting Purposes Only)	
	
	
or Non-Expiring
Age 75 or older with 
school bus 
endorsement
New: $14.00
Renewal: $9.00
Age 75 or older with 
school bus 
endorsement
New: $16.50
Renewal: $9.00
New / Renewal Permit 
	
Type	
 Minimum Age	
Cost	
Valid For...
Student Permit	
15	
$1.00	
Length of Approved Course
Instruction Permit	
15	
$10.00	
0–12 months
Motorcycle Permit	
15½ or 16	
   $12.75 or $10.00	
0–6 months (182 days)
Commercial	
	
	
1 year (360 days or less) 
Learner’s Permit	
18	
$19.00	
nonrenewable
	
	
	
	 
8

9
Restrictions
If you have limited driving experience or a medical condition that impairs your 
ability to drive safely, you may receive a restricted license permitting you to 
drive only under specific conditions. If you have a restricted license, it will 
have one or more of the restriction codes shown below. You may be required 
to take a driving test in order to have a restriction removed from your license. 
If you disobey the restriction(s), you can be charged with driving without a 
license, and if convicted, points will be placed on your driving record. If you 
receive too many points (see Chapter 11), your license may be suspended 
or revoked.
Restriction Codes
A	 Corrective Lenses	
N	 No Class A or B Passenger Vehicle
B	 Outside Rearview Mirror	
O	 No Tractor-Trailer CMV
C	 Daylight Driving Only	
P	
No Passengers In CMV Bus
D	 Auto Trans/Power Steering	
Q	 More Than Five Restrictions
E	 No Manual Transmission CMV	
R	 Special Seat Cushion
F	
Restricted to 45 MPH	
T	
Right Outside Mirror
G	 25 Mile Radius	
U	 Uncoded Restriction*
H	 Special Hand Devices	
V	
Medical Variance
I	
Intermediate License	
W	 Farm Waiver
J	
Electrical Turn Signals 	
X	
No Cargo in CMV Tank Vehicle
K	 Intrastate Driving Only (CDL)	
Y	
Left Outside Mirror
L	
Non-Airbrake CMV	
Z	
No Full Air Brake Equipped CMV
M	 No Class A Passenger Vehicle
*An uncoded restriction is any restriction not listed here. An uncoded 
restriction will be listed as a “U” in the restriction area of the driver license 
or permit and the description will display on the back of the document, 
space permitting. Any law enforcement officer, judge, or physician can ask 
the Department to place restrictions on your license.
Medical Referral 
There are two reasons you may be required to submit a physician’s 
statement to the Department of Revenue:
•  	 You have had epileptic seizures, convulsions, or blackouts within the 
six months prior to your application for a license.
•  	 A driver examiner, license clerk, family member, law enforcement
	 officer, physician, physical therapist, occupational therapist, 	
	
	 chiropractor, registered nurse, psychologist, social worker, professional 
	 counselor, optometrist, or emergency medical technician, believes you 
	 may have some other medical condition that would make you an 
	 unsafe driver. This person must complete a Driver Condition Report 
	 (Form 4319) and submit it to the Department.
Endorsements
Endorsements are just the opposite of restrictions because they qualify you
to do things you couldn’t do without the endorsement, such as: drive a 
school bus or operate a motorcycle. The endorsements available for your 
non-commercial (class F, E, or M) Missouri driver license are listed on the 
following page.

10
•  	 School Bus (S) endorsement — A school bus endorsement is required 	
	 for anyone transporting students from school to home, home to school,
	 and to and from school-sponsored events in any vehicle designed for 		
	 carrying more than ten passengers. A school bus endorsement may 	 	
	 be issued to drivers age 21 or older who hold a Class E (For-Hire) license 	
	 or a commercial license with a Passenger (P) endorsement. A school bus 	
	 endorsement can be suspended for one year if a person fails to pass any
	 drug, alcohol, or chemical test administered in accordance with any federal 	
	 or state law, rule, or regulation regarding the operation of a school bus.
	 Missouri law has special operating regulations for school buses. For 
	 drivers aged 75 or older holding a school bus endorsement mandatory 
	 school bus skills testing must be completed biennially to retain the 
	 endorsement. If you need more information related to general school 
	 transportation requirements, contact: Missouri Department of Elementary 
	 and Secondary Education, Division of Administrative and Financial 
	 Services — School Transportation, e-mail: webreply@dmpt. desemo. gov;
	 phone: (573) 751-0357; fax: (573) 526-6898.
•	 	 Motorcycle (M) endorsement — A motorcycle endorsement on an operator
	
	 or higher class license is required if you operate a motorcycle or motortricycle
 	 	 on public roadways. To add the motorcycle endorsement to an existing 	
	
	 license you will need to pass the motorcycle written test, vision, road sign, 	
	
	 and a skills test on a motorcycle or motortricycle. For more information 	
	
	 about Missouri’s motorcycle laws, see the Motorcycle Operator Manual 	
	
	 posted on our website at dor. mo. gov/. You may also request a copy from 	
	
	 MSHP or any license office. 
•  		 Additional endorsements are available if you have a Commercial Driver 	
	 License or Commercial Learner’s Permit. For more information about 	
	 Missouri’s commercial driving laws, see the Commercial Driver License
	 Manual posted on our website at dor. mo. gov/. You may also request a 	
	 copy from MSHP or any license office. 
Renewing a License or Permit - Renewal Reminders
The Department will mail you a reminder to renew before your license expires. 
A renewal notice will not be mailed for a temporary instruction permit or 
commercial learner’s permit. The reminder will be sent to the mailing address 
on your driver record. When you move, you may update your address in one 
of the following ways: 
•  		 Complete an address change at your local license office; or
•  		 Online at dor. mo. gov/.
Your reminder may state the fee required to renew your license. You 
can renew your license up to six months before it expires. Each time you 
renew, you will be required to take the vision and road sign test. 
It is your responsibility to renew your driver license, even if you do not 
receive your reminder. Failure to renew promptly may cause you to have to 
retake the written and driving tests. You can be ticketed for driving without 
a valid license. Exception: If you will be leaving the state or country for an 
extended time you may request an early renewal of your driver license at 
your local license office. 

11
A driver license may be valid for up to six years. If you allow it to expire, you 
must not drive. If you would like to continue driving uninterrupted, you must 
renew your license before it expires. If you do not renew your license within 
six months (or 184 days) after its expiration date, you will have to take the 
written and driving tests (see Chapter 2), in addition to the vision and road 
sign tests.
License offices are usually busiest at the end of each month. Since you 
may renew your license up to six months (184 days) before it expires, you 
are encouraged to select a time to avoid the longer lines. If the renewal 
dates for your driver license and motor vehicle registration renewal are 
within six months, you may be able to complete both renewals at the same 
time and save yourself a trip later to the license office.
Renewal by Mail for Active Duty Members of the Armed Forces  
Missouri allows renewal by mail for members of the armed forces and their
dependents. Applicants should submit a completed Mail-In Driver License
Application (Form 4317) (available online at dor. mo. gov/ or faxed upon 
request), along with required documents and fees.
Missouri allows a renewal without re-examination for members of the armed 
forces whose license has expired while out of state, for up to six months 
from honorable discharge or within 90 days of reestablishing residency 
in Missouri, whichever occurs first. The expired Missouri license and 
discharge papers must be submitted at the time of application in addition to
other applicable renewal documents. The expired license is not valid for 
driving. These provisions only waive re-examination and do not extend the 
actual driving privileges beyond the expiration date.
Lost, Stolen, or Destroyed License
If your license is lost or stolen while you are out of state, you may request a 
Mail-In Driver License Application (Form 4317) by phone at (573) 751-4600 
or download the form on our website.
If your license is lost, stolen, or destroyed, you must apply for a duplicate 
license. If your current license expires within the next six months, you may 
renew your license early rather than obtain a duplicate license. This saves 
you time and money.
Renewing When Your License is Suspended or Revoked
If you held a non-commercial driver license, you may take the vision and 
road sign tests and renew your license even while your driving privilege is 
suspended. However, if your driving privilege has been revoked, you may 
only renew your license during the revocation if it resulted from your refusal 
to take a chemical test.
You will not receive your license back until you have completed your 
reinstatement requirements and your driving privilege has been reinstated.
Other Information About Your Driver License
•	
Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Information
	
When you apply for a new, renewal, or duplicate instruction permit, 
	
driver license or nondriver ID you will be asked two very important 
	
questions at the time you make your application.

12
1.	 “Do you consent to be listed in the Donor Registry System as an 
	
organ, eye and tissue donor?”
	
If you say “yes”, your name will automatically be added to the Missouri 
	
Organ and Tissue Donor Registry, managed by the Missouri Department 
	
of Health and Senior Services or their agent. The registry is on a secure,
	
confidential database. The registry is a first-person consent registry 
	
making your decision to to be added to the registry by answering “yes”, 
	
or to be removed from the registry, by answering “no”, final unless 
	
further action is taken by you. Joining the registry means you have 	 	
	
legally documented your decision to save lives by becoming an organ 
	
and tissue donor at the time of your death. No further consent is needed, 
	
which relieves your family of making that decision on your behalf.
2.	 “Do you authorize an Organ Donor symbol to be placed on your license
	
or permit?”
	
If you said yes to be listed in the Donor Registry system you will also be 
	
asked if you would like an optional indicator placed on your document. If 
	
you say “yes” to add the organ donor symbol, a red heart with a green 
	
banner will appear on the front of your instruction permit, driver license, or 
	
nondriver ID. There is no fee to place the symbol on your instruction 
	
permit, driver license or nondriver ID, or place your name in the registry. 
	
You may obtain more information regarding the donor registry or register 
	
your decision and enroll online at donatelifemissouri. org/.
	
•  	 The back of your license or permit will include a box for placement 
	 of an Organ Donor Sticker.  If you did not elect to register with the 
	 Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Registry, or you registered and did 
	 not elect to have a symbol placed on the face of your document at 
	 the time of issuance, you may complete registration or request an 
	 Organ Donor Sticker online at donatelifemissouri. org/.
	
•  	 When you apply for a driver license, permit or nondriver ID the clerk 
must ask you if you would like to make a monetary donation to the 
organ donor fund or the blindness awareness fund.  
	
•  	 “DHH” Notation for Deaf or Hard of Hearing Applicants
When you apply for or renew your driver license, nondriver ID, or 
instruction permit, you may ask that a “DHH” notation be placed 
on your driver license, nondriver ID, or instruction permit. In the 
event of an emergency, this notation will allow law enforcement 
or emergency and medical personnel to readily determine if you 
are deaf or hard of hearing. This will assist in ensuring effective 
communications with someone who is injured and nonresponsive. 
In order to obtain the “DHH” notation, you must request the notation 
when applying for a license or instruction permit.
•  	
Boater Safety Indicator  

If you are a resident of Missouri who has complied with the provisions 	
of Section 306. 127, RSMo.  and possess a current Boating Safety 	
Education Card issued by the MSHP, you may request to obtain a 
boater safety indicator on your driver license or nondriver ID. The 
MSHP will accept the indicator on a valid driver license or nondriver 
ID in lieu of carrying the separate Boating Safety Education Card. 
You must request the new indicator and present your valid Boating 
12

13
Safety Education Card at the time of application for a new, renewal 
or duplicate transaction. There will be an additional cost of $1 added to 
standard processing fees when the boater identification indicator is initially 
added to a driver license or nondriver ID document.   
•  	 Permanent Disability Indicator 
	
If you are a resident of Missouri who is permanently disabled you may
	
request to have a permanent disability indicator placed on the back of 		
	
your driver license or nondriver ID at the time of application for a new, 
	
renewal or duplicate transaction. To be eligible for the indicator you must 
	
submit a Physicians Statement (Form 5294) - Permanent Disability 	

	
Indicator completed and signed by your physician, physical therapist,
	
occupational therapist licensed under Section 334, RSMo. , or other
	
authorized healthcare practitioner. There will be no additional cost to add 	
	
the indicator. The standard new, renewal, or duplicate transaction and
	
processing fees will apply. You are not required by law to obtain a 
	
permanent disability indicator on your driver license or non-driver license. 
	
The indicator is not determination of eligibility or public benefits.
•  	
Veteran Designation 
  
If you are a veteran of the United States Armed Forces you may opt to 
have a “VETERAN” designation placed on the front of your Missouri driver 
license or nondriver ID, upon request, at the time of application for a new, 
renewal or duplicate transaction. To be eligible for the designation, you 
must submit one of the following acceptable discharge status verification 
documents:
	
○
a United States Department of Defense discharge document, 
	
otherwise known as a DD Form 214, that shows a discharge status of 
	
“honorable” 
	
or “general under honorable conditions” that establishes the person’s 	
	
service in the Armed Forces of the United States; 
	
○
a United States Uniformed Services Identification Card, otherwise 
	
known as a DD Form 2, that includes a discharge status of “retired” or 
	
“reserve retired” establishing the person’s service in the Armed Forces 
	
of the United States;
	
○
a United States Department of Veterans Affairs photo identification 	
	
card; or 
	
○
a United States Military discharge document WD AGO 53, WD AGO 
	
55, WD AGO 53-55, NAVPERS 553, NAVMC 78 PD, NAVCG 553, 	
	
D 256MC, DD 256MC, or DD 215 form that shows a discharge status 	
	
of “honorable” or “general under  honorable conditions”.
There will be no additional cost to add the indicator. The standard new, renewal 
or duplicate transaction and processing fees will apply. You are not required by 
law to obtain the Veteran Designation.
Ever served on active duty in the United States Armed Forces?
If yes, visit dor. mo. gov/military/ to see the services and benefits DOR offers 
to all eligible military individuals, or complete the survey at mvc. dps. mo. gov/
MoVeteransInformation/Survey/DOR to receive information from the Mis­
souri Veterans Commission. A list of all state agency resourcesand benefits 
can be found at veteranbenefits.mo.gov/state-benefits/.
•	
Medical Alert Notation
	
You may request to have a medical alert notation placed on the front of 
	
your driver license or nondriver ID at the time of application for a new, 

14
	
renewal or duplicate transaction to indicate a medical alert for: Post
	
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD); Diabetes Mellitus (DM); Autism; Drug
	
Allergy; Epilepsy (EPIL); Alzheimer’s (ATD); Dementia (DEM);
	
Schizophrenia (SCHZ); High Blood Pressure (HBP); Speech Impaired; or 
	
Cardiovascular Disease (CVD). You are not required by law to have a 
	
medical alert notation on your driver license or nondriver ID. To be eligible
	
for the medical alert notation you must submit a Physicians statement –
	
Medical Alert Notation (Form 5839) that has been completed and signed
	
by a licensed physician, therapist, occupational therapist, or other
	
authorized license healthcare practitioner in the state of Missouri verifying 
	
such diagnosis. There is no additional cost to add the medical alert 
	
notation.  
•	
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA)
	
The Federal Driver’s Privacy Protection Act requires all states to close 
	
the personal information contained on all motor vehicle, driver license and 
	
nondriver ID records, unless otherwise directed by state law. Under 
	
Missouri law, a person or entity may access the personal information if 
	
exempt under the DPPA (and have submitted a Request for Security 
	
Access Code (Form 4678) or have obtained express consent from the 
	
record holder on a Request from Record Holder (Form 4681).
•	
Voter Registration
	
When you apply for or renew your driver license, nondriver ID, or 	

	
instruction permit, the clerk will ask you if you are registered to vote at 	
	
your current address. If your voter registration address has changed or if
 	
you have changed your name since your prior voter registration application
 	
(as shown on voter registration card) you may elect to submit updated 	
	
voter registration information by responding “Yes” to register to vote at the 	
	
time of license application. New or updated voter registration information 	
	
will be generated for your review and signature as part of your application. 	
	
Data from the application which is required for voter registration purposes
	
will then be submitted electronically through the Missouri Voter Registration 
	
System to local election authorities.
•	
Selective Service Registration
	
Male applicants, age 18 to 26, may register with the Selective Service at 	
	
the time of their license or permit application.
Suspension or Revocation of Your License
There are a number of reasons your license may be revoked or suspended or 
denied. Your best bet is to be responsible and be a good driver. You can lose 
your license for any of the following reasons:
•  	 Parent or Guardian Request to Deny a Driver License (Form 4811) — If 
you are under the age 18, your parent or guardian may request that the 
Director of Revenue deny you a license. If you already have a driver 
license, the request will cancel your license. When the Department 
receives the request, a denial will be placed on your driving record. 
The denial expires when you turn 18 or when your parent or guardian 
requests your driving status be cleared. Form 4811 may be found on the 
Department’s website or at any license office.
•	
Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs (see Chapter 10).
•	
Refusing to let a police officer test you for alcohol or drugs.
•	
Leaving the scene of a traffic accident.
•	
Failing to file an accident report (see Chapter 13).
•	
Giving false information when you apply for a license.

15
•	
Failing to settle a court judgment made against you for damages 	
	
	
resulting from a motor vehicle accident.
•	
Failing to keep insurance (financial responsibility) (see Chapter 13).
•	
Changing the information on your license or using someone else’s 		
	
license when you attempt to buy alcohol.
•	
Failing to appear for an exam when requested by the Driver License Bureau.
•	
Using a motor vehicle to commit a felony or causing the death of 	 	
	
someone in a motor vehicle crash.
•	
Having too many points on your driving record (see Chapter 11).
•	
Letting someone else use your driver license.
•	
Failing to appear in court or pay traffic tickets in Missouri or other states.
•	
Failing to pay child support.
•	
Failing to use an ignition interlock device when required.
•	
Stealing fuel from a gas station.
•	
Possessing any intoxicating liquor if you are a minor.
•	
Submitting false proof of insurance.
•	
Failing to yield the right-of-way and causing injury or death.
The Graduated Driver License (GDL) Law
Missouri’s Graduated Driver License Law requires all first-time drivers under 
18 years old to obtain an instruction permit and complete a period of driving 
with a licensed driver, followed by a period of restricted driving (intermediate 
license), before getting a full license.
Studies from across the country show that deaths and serious injuries from 
traffic crashes involving young drivers decline by as much as 58 percent 
after a Graduated Driver License Law is implemented. Consider the
instruction permit as Step One, the intermediate license as Step Two, and
the full (Under 21) driver license as Step Three. The following are 
descriptions of each step to help you understand the GDL program.
Step One: Instruction Permit  Eligible Age: 15  See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-12 months, based on document verification status
To Obtain an Instruction Permit:
•  	
Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests.
•  	
A parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer (with a federal 	
residential job training program) must accompany you to the license 	
office to sign a permission statement.
Permit Notes:
•  	
Under age 16, you may drive only when accompanied in the front seat 	
	
by a parent, stepparent, grandparent, legal guardian, qualified driving 	
	
instructor, or a person who is at least 25 years of age who has been 	
	
licensed for a minimum of three years and has received written 
	
permission from the parent or legal guardian. If your parent, stepparent, 
	
grandparent, or legal guardian is physically disabled, he or she may 	 	
	
designate up to two persons to accompany you in the vehicle to provide 	
	
behind-the-wheel instruction.
•  	
At age 16 or older, you may drive when accompanied in the front seat 	
	
by a person who is at least 21 years old and has a valid driver license.
•	
Seat belts must be worn by the driver and all passengers.
•  	
Your driver examination record alone is not legal for driving.  Be 	
	
sure to carry your permit with you.
•  	
You may renew your instruction permit as many times as needed 	 	
	
without taking additional written tests.

•  	
Free “PERMIT DRIVER” window signs are available at all license offices.
To Graduate to an Intermediate License:
 You must have an instruction permit for a minimum of six months (182 
days) beginning the day after issuance.
•	
You must have completed 40 hours of driving instruction with a parent, 	
	
stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer (with a federal residential 	
	
job training program). The required 40 hours must include at least ten 	
	
hours of nighttime driving.
Step Two:  Intermediate License  Eligible Age: 16 to 18  
See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-2 years, based on document verification status
To Obtain an Intermediate License:
•	
You must satisfy the requirements (listed in step one) to graduate from 	
	
the instruction permit, and hold the instruction permit for at least six 
	
months (182 days) beginning the day after issuance. This includes   	
	
having no alcohol-related convictions in the last 12 months and no 	 	
	
traffic convictions in the last six months.
•	
A parent, grandparent, stepparent, legal guardian, or certified trainer 	
	
(with a federal residential job training program) must accompany you 	
	
to the license office to verify you have received 40 hours of driving 	 	
	
instruction with your instruction permit.
•	
Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests (if applicable), if previous 	
	
results are more than one year old.
•	
Pass the driving test.
License Notes:
•	
Your driver examination record alone is not legal for driving. Be sure to 	
	
carry your intermediate license with you.
•	
Seat belts must be worn by the driver and all passengers.
•	
Passenger restrictions outlined below may not be applicable to an 	 	
	
intermediate license holder who is operating in agricultural work-related 	
	
activities.
Driving Restrictions:
•	
During the first six months, you may not operate a motor vehicle with 	
	
more than one passenger who is under the age of 19 and who is not a 	
	
member of your immediate family*.
•	
After the first six months, you may not operate a motor vehicle with more 	
	
than three passengers who are under 19 years of age and who are not 	
	
members of your immediate family*.
•	
You may not drive alone between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. except to 	
	
and from a school activity, job, or an emergency, unless accompanied 	
	
by a licensed driver 21 years of age or older.
* Immediate family shall include parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, 
stepbrothers, stepsisters, and adopted or foster children residing in the 
driver’s household. Parent shall include a foster parent, stepparent or 
adoptive parent. Grandparent shall include a foster grandparent, step-
grandparent or adoptive grandparent.
If you are under 21 years of age, the Department will issue you a license 
identifying you as a minor. When you become 21 years old, you may apply 
and pay for another driver license (without the minor indication) or wait until 
your under-21 driver license expires.
16

A Checklist for You
You must have the following documents with you when you apply for a Missouri driver license, 
instruction permit, or nondriver ID. Take all the documents with you to a license office when 
you apply for your license or permit.
New Missouri Resident Transferring An Out-of-State Driver License
(valid or expired no more than 184 days)
	
	 Out-of-State driver license (valid or expired no more than 184 days)
	
	 Proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name and date of birth), 	
	
	
	
social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri residency*
	
	
Note: If you are upgrading your driver license, take the above documents with you to a 
MSHP examination location when you take the written, vision, and road sign tests and/or
driving test.
First-Time Applicant
	
	 First-Time Applicant Proof of lawful status, identity (must include full legal name 
and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, and Missouri 
residency* driver examination record indicating successful completion of tests (not 
required for nondriver ID)
	
	 Driver Examination Record (Form 100) indicating successful completion of tests 	
	
	
(not required for nondriver ID)
Renewal License
	
	 All drivers renewing will have to show proof of lawful status, identity (must include 	
	
	
full legal name and date of birth), social security number, name change if applicable, 	
	
	
and Missouri residency*
	
	
Exemption: If you are renewing a non-commercial permit/driver license or nondriver 	
	
	
ID and are age 65 or older may be exempt from presenting documents for place of 	
	
	
birth.
*Please refer to the complete list of acceptable documents for a REAL ID-compliant 
	 or non REAL ID-compliant document application on-line at www. dor. mo. gov.
Note: Additional documents and verification of SSN may be required if the 
documentation submitted is questionable, or if the license office clerk or MSHP 
examiner has reason to question the validity or authenticity of the documents, 
or needs further verification.
17
You are encouraged to study this Driver Guide before you attempt the written
exam. Almost 50 percent of all test-takers fail the first time. You will have a
much better chance of passing your test if you take time to review this guide.
To Graduate to a Full Under-21 Driver License:
•	 	 Your driving privilege cannot be suspended, revoked, or denied at the 	
	 time of application.
•	 	 You may not have any alcohol-related offenses or traffic convictions 
within the last 12 months.
Step Three: Full Driver License (Under 21) 
Eligible Age: 18  See chart on Page 8 for cost.
Valid: 0-3 years, based on document verification status
To Obtain the Under-21 Full Driver License:
•	
You must satisfy the requirements for an intermediate license. This 	 	
	
includes having no alcohol-related offenses or traffic convictions in
	
the last 12 months.
•  	 Have a valid intermediate license. Your driving privilege cannot be
	
suspended, revoked, or denied when you apply for a full driver license.
•  	 Pass the vision and road sign recognition tests. (You are not required 	
	 to pass the written and driving tests if already completed.)

Chapter 2 - The Driver Examination
The Driver Examination
The driver examination consists of a four-part test:
•	
A written test on traffic laws and rules for safe driving
•	
A vision test
•	
A road sign test
•  	 A driving test (skills)
You should be prepared to take the driver exam if:
• 	 You are applying for a new Missouri driver license.
	
Note: If you have a driver license from another state that is valid or has 	
	
been expired for less than 184 days, and you are applying for the same type 	
	
of license in Missouri, you only have to take the vision and road sign tests.
•	 Your Missouri driver license is expired for more than six months (184 days).
•	 The Director of Revenue asks you to take the exam, even if you have 	
	
a current driver license.
•	 Your license was revoked because:
	
○
You have too many points on your driving record.
	
○
Because of an Administrative Alcohol action (see Chapter 10).
Where to Take the Exam
The MSHP administers the driver examination. To find the testing center 
nearest you, contact the MSHP or the Department. The phone numbers for 
the Department and MSHP are at the back of this guide. You can also find 
these locations on the MSHP website: http://www. mshp. dps. missouri. gov/
MSHPWeb/Root/index. html.
Verification of Your Name and Age
Before you can take the driver exam, you must prove your legal name and
age. This identification must also be shown to the Department of Revenue 
when applying for a driver license or permit and any time you take the written
or driving tests. (Refer to Chapter 1 for a list of acceptable documents for 
verification of name, date of birth, place of birth, social security number, and 
Missouri residential address.)
Written Test
Driver License (Class F) 
If you are applying for a Class F (operator) license, you must take a 25 
question multiple-choice written test. The questions will be on the laws and 
methods of driving covered in this Guide. The test is NOT an open book 
test. You will not be tested on the information on commercial vehicles in 
Chapter 15.
For-Hire License (Class E)
If you are applying for a Class E (for-hire) license, you must take a special 
written test. The questions will be on the laws and methods of driving 
covered in this Guide but will also include the information on commercial 
vehicles found in Chapter 15. The test is NOT an open book test.
Vision Test
You must take an acuity vision test and a peripheral (side) vision test when 
you apply for any new or renewal driver license or permit. The standard 
minimum acuity is at least 20/40 with either or both eyes. If you wear glasses 
18

19
or contact lenses, you may need them for the vision test. The standard 
minimum peripheral reading is at least 55 degrees in each eye or 85 degrees 
in one eye. If you are unable to meet the vision standards as required, you 
may be denied a license, or restrictions may be placed on your license.
If you fail the standard vision test, the examiner will give you a vision 
exam form that your eye specialist or physician must fill out. If the physician 
prescribes glasses or contact lenses to correct your vision, you may have 
to wait for the glasses (or contact lenses) before the written and/or driving 
tests may be given. If both your natural and corrected acuity vision are 
worse than 20/160, or your peripheral combined is worse than 70 degrees, 
you cannot take the driving test and cannot have a driver license.
Road Sign Test
The road sign test will check your ability to recognize and understand traffic 
signs.
Driving Test
After you pass the written, vision, and road sign tests, you may then take 
the driving test. You will take the driving test with a driver license examiner 
of the MSHP. 
The examiner will check your vehicle for the required equipment. The 
examiner will also check your vehicle for its safe operating condition. You 
cannot take the test if the vehicle is not properly equipped, or the examiner 
believes that giving the test will be dangerous.
You should take the test in a vehicle that is familiar to you. The vehicle must 
have:
•	 Current license plate(s) and a valid inspection sticker.
•	 Seat belts in proper working order.
•	 Doors in proper working order for the driver and examiner.
•	 A clean, safe seat for the examiner.
•	 Two sets of brakes (parking and a foot brake) in good working order.
•	 A horn in good working order.
•	 Proof of financial responsibility.
You will drive, and the examiner will sit beside you. No one else may ride 
in the vehicle during the test. Avoid unnecessary conversation with the 
examiner, and focus on your driving. Remember the examiner’s job is to 
test, not to teach. You must obey all Missouri traffic laws at all times. 
The examiner will ask you to find and use the vehicle’s controls, such 
as the accelerator, brakes, turn signals, windshield wipers, etc. You will be 
tested for:
•	 Finding the control without searching.
•	 Using the control correctly.
The examiner will ask you to start driving. You will be tested for:
•	 Starting the vehicle.
•	 Releasing the parking brake.
•	 Looking to see if the way is clear.
•	 Giving the proper signal.
•	 Driving smoothly and at the correct speed.

20
The examiner will tell you where to drive, turn, stop, etc.
After the examiner tells you what to do, you will have enough time to look 
for traffic and to drive as asked. You will be asked to do the following:
1.	 Start and stop the vehicle. You will be tested for:
	
•	
The smoothness and safety of your starts and stops.
	
•	
Your reaction time.
	
•	
Your control of the vehicle when stopping.
2.  Park parallel to the curb, in a space 25 feet long and seven feet wide.  
You will be tested for:
	
•	
The position of your vehicle before backing.
	
•	
Whether or not you bump into the space markers.
	
•	
Moving into the space smoothly and at the right speed.
	
•	
Parking no more than 18” from the curb.
	
•	
Parking near the center of the space.
	
•	
Ability to park the vehicle within two minutes.
	
•	
Turning the wheels in the correct direction for parking.
	
•	
Checking traffic and signaling before you leave the parking space.
3.  Backing. You will be tested for:
	
•	
Looking over your right shoulder to see through the rear glass.
	
•	
Whether your vehicle backs in a straight line or weaves.
	
•	
Staying in the proper lane of traffic.
	
•	
Backing at the right speed.
4.  Make at least two right and two left turns. You will be tested for:
	
•	
Driving in the correct lane for turning.
	
•	
Giving the proper turn signal at the proper time.
	
•	
Turning into the proper lane.
	
•	
Making proper traffic checks.
	
•	
Turning at the right speed.
	
•	
Your control of the vehicle.
5.  Park on a hill. You will be tested for:
	•	
Your control of the vehicle.
	•	
Parking no more than 18” from the curb.
	•	
Leaving your vehicle in park or the correct gear.
	•	
Turning the front wheels in the correct direction for parking.
	•	
Setting the parking brake.
	•	
Checking traffic and signaling.
6.  Enter and leave intersections.  You will be tested for:
	
•	
Understanding and obeying the traffic signs and lights.
	
•	
Your speed when approaching an intersection.
	
•	
Your awareness of the traffic around you.
	
•	
Driving in the correct lane.
	
•	
Yielding the right-of-way without blocking traffic.
	
•	
Making a full stop at the proper place at stop signs.
7.  Understand and obey traffic signs and signals. You will be tested for:
	
•	
Noticing and obeying traffic signs and signals.

21
The examiner will watch for your use of good driving rules.  You will be 
tested for:
•  	The distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front of you.
•  	Your speed while driving.
•  	Driving in the proper lane and obeying lane markings.
•  	Your awareness of the traffic around you.
•  	Yielding the right-of-way when necessary.
Your Grade
Throughout the driving test, the examiner will subtract points for any driving 
errors you make. If you lose more than 30 points, you will fail the test. You 
will also fail the test if you:
•  	 Are in a crash with another vehicle and it is your fault;
•  	 Hit a pedestrian;
•  	 Drive so dangerously you might have caused a traffic crash;
•  	 Violate a traffic law; or
•  	 Refuse to drive as the examiner asks.
When you pass the driving skills test, you will be given a form with your test 
results. Before you drive, you must apply and obtain a license at a license 
office. The test result form itself is not valid for driving.
Failing the Driving Test
If you fail the driving test, the examiner will suggest that you practice 
before retaking the test. You may take only one driving test per day. If 
you fail the driving test three times, no further tests will be allowed without 
written authorization from the Department. Information regarding the test 
failures will be transmitted to the Department of Revenue. You will receive 
a letter from the Department requiring additional behind-the-wheel driver 
training. You must send proof of the additional driver training administered 
by an eligible driver and obtain an approval to test from the Department of 
Revenue before you will be allowed to take the driving test again.
Fraud
It is a crime to commit fraud. Anyone who makes a false unsworn statement
or affidavit or who commits or assists another person in committing fraud or 
deception during any examination process for a Missouri license, permit, or 
nondriver ID, is guilty of fraud. Fraud is a Class “A” misdemeanor that may 
result in the loss of your driving privilege for up to one year.
Some examples of fraud could include cheating, or using or attempting to 
use any recording, photographic, or two-way communicating device during 
any testing process.

Your highest duty as a motorist is to drive your vehicle carefully and prudently. 
Your speed and manner of driving must create a safe environment for yourself 
and other road users, including pedestrians, cyclists, and other motorists.
Right-of-Way
Where vehicles or pedestrians are likely to meet one another, and there 
are no signs or signals to regulate traffic, there are rules that say who must 
yield the right-of-way. These rules tell drivers who goes first and who must 
wait in different traffic situations.
The law says who must yield the right-of-way; it does not give any driver 
the right-of-way. You must do everything you can to prevent striking a 
pedestrian or another vehicle, regardless of the circumstances.
Passing
Passing is a dangerous maneuver where the dangers are compounded 
by intersections, other vehicles within an intersection and two-lane roads 
(Refer to No Passing Zones in Chapter 3).
If you are caught speeding or passing in a construction zone or work zone on 
Missouri state roadways, you could be fined a minimum of $250 for the first 
offense and a minimum of $300 for a second or subsequent offense in addition 
to any other fine authorized by law according to Section 304. 582, RSMo.
Use the same care when passing a pedestrian or cyclist as when passing a 
motor vehicle. You may need to slow down and wait for a safe opportunity to 
pass a pedestrian or cyclist, just as you would for any other slow-moving traffic.
Passing on the Right
The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another 
vehicle only under the following conditions: 
•	 When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
•	 Upon a city street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two 	
	
or more lines of vehicles in each direction; 
•	 Upon a one-way street; or
•	 Upon any highway outside of a city with unobstructed pavement of 	 	
	
sufficient width and clearly marked for four or more lanes of traffic.
In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or 
main traveled portion of the roadway (shoulder).
Passing on the Left
No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under 
the following conditions when: 
•	 Approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve of the highway where the 	
	
driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the 	
	
event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
•	 The view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, 	
	
viaduct, or tunnel;
•	 Approaching within 100 feet of or at any intersection or railroad grade 	
	
crossing; or
•	 There is a solid yellow line.
Chapter 3 - Rules of the Road
22

23
Intersections 
The following right-of-way rules apply at intersections:
•   Drivers must yield where necessary to avoid striking pedestrians who are 
legally crossing the road;
•   Drivers crossing a sidewalk, entering or exiting a driveway, alley, or 
parking lot must yield to pedestrians. It is illegal to drive on a sidewalk 
except to cross;
•   Drivers turning left must yield to oncoming vehicles going straight; 
•   At a four-way stop, the driver reaching the intersection first may proceed 
before the other drivers (after coming to a complete stop);
•   Drivers entering a road from a driveway, alley, or roadside must yield to 
vehicles already on the main road;
•   At an intersection where there is no stop sign or traffic signal (with the 
exception of roundabouts), drivers must yield to vehicles coming from the 
right; and
•   When approaching a roundabout intersection, always yield to traffic in 
the circle and pedestrians in the crosswalks. Wait for a gap in traffic 
before entering.
Emergency Vehicles
You must yield the right-of-way to police, fire, ambulance, or any other 
emergency vehicles using a siren or air horn, and a red or blue flashing light.  
Pull over to the right edge of the road, or as near to the right as possible, 
when you see or hear an emergency vehicle approaching from any direction. 
If you are in an intersection, drive through the intersection before you pull 
over. Remain stopped until the emergency vehicle passes. Follow any 
instructions given over the emergency vehicle’s loudspeaker. Emergency 
vehicles may follow each other so proceed only when the way is clear.
When approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying lighted red or 
red and blue lights, you must:
•   Proceed with caution, and if it is safe to do so, make a lane change into 
a lane not adjacent to the stationary vehicle (if on a roadway having at 
least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same 
direction as the approaching vehicle); or 
•   Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining 
a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would be unsafe or 
impossible. 
For more information regarding the “Move Over Law” see page 93. 
School Buses
When a school bus stops to load or unload school children, the driver 
activates the mechanical and electrical signaling devices to notify other 
drivers of an impending stop. Amber warning lights will flash 500 feet 
before the bus comes to a designated stop. When the school bus is 
stopped, the alternate flashing red lights and the stop signal arm are 
activated. Oncoming and following traffic must stop before they reach the 
bus when these signals are activated. You must stop:
•	 On a two-lane road where the vehicles travel in either direction.
•	 On a two-lane road that is a one
	
way street.

No driver of a school bus shall
take on or discharge passengers 
at any location upon a highway 
consisting of four or more lanes of 
traffic, whether or not divided by a 
median or barrier, in such a manner 
as to require the passengers to cross 
more than two lanes of traffic. The following are situations when you do not 
have to stop:  
•	 When you are traveling the opposite direction of a school bus on a highway 	
	
divided by a median where the vehicles traveling one direction are on a 		
	
totally separate road from the vehicles traveling the opposite direction;
•	 When you are traveling the opposite direction of a school bus on a
highway containing four or more lanes of traffic; or 
•	 When a school bus is stopped in a loading zone (at a school) where
students are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
After stopping for a school bus that is unloading school children, watch 
for school children walking along the side of the road. You must remain 
stopped until the bus moves or the bus driver signals for you to proceed. 
Proceed with caution.
Hand and Vehicle Signals
Before you stop, turn or change lanes, let the other drivers know what you 
are going to do by signaling. You can signal with your hand and arm or 
with your vehicle’s turn signals and brake lights. You should signal at least 
100 feet before you turn so the other drivers can be ready. Check your 
vehicle’s turn signals often to ensure they are working properly.
The pictures below show the correct hand signals to use when turning or 
stopping.
Turns
As a good driver, you should get into the proper turn lane and signal at 
least 100 feet before you turn. Before you make any turn, you should look 
both ways for oncoming traffic or pedestrians.
If there are no signs or lane markings to control turning, you should turn from 
the lane that is closest to the direction you want to go, and turn into the lane 
closest to the one you came from. This way, you will cross the fewest lanes 
of traffic. When making turns, go from one lane to the other as smoothly as 
possible without crossing lane lines or interfering with traffic. Once you have 
completed your turn, you can change to another lane if you need to. 
24

25
U-Turns
You should only make a U-turn when it is safe. U-turns should not be 
made on any curve or near the crest of a hill when your vehicle may not be 
seen by other drivers. Some towns and cities do not allow U-turns. Never 
make a U-turn at a location that is marked with a “No U-Turn” sign or at an 
intersection controlled by a traffic signal or police officer.
Right Turns
On right turns, avoid swinging wide to the left 
before turning. If you swing wide, the driver 
behind you may think you are changing lanes 
or going to turn left, and may try to pass you 
on the right. If you swing wide as you complete 
the turn, drivers who are in the far lane will not 
expect to see you there and you could cause a 
crash. 
Left Turns
When making a left turn, avoid cutting the 
corner so sharply that you run into someone 
approaching from the left. However, you must 
leave room for oncoming vehicles to turn left
in front of you. 
One-Way Street onto a Two-Way Street
Begin the turn in the left lane. Enter the two-
way road to the right of its yellow dividing
line. If the two-way road is a four-lane road,
you may enter it in the right lane if that lane
is free of traffic.
Two-Way Street Onto a One-Way Street
Begin the turn with your left wheel as close
as possible to the yellow dividing line. If the
one-way road has two lanes, turn into its left 
lane or right lane, whichever is free of traffic.

Two-Way Street onto a Two-Way Street 
Begin the turn with your left wheels as close
as possible to the yellow dividing line. Enter
the road to the right of its center line. If the 
road onto which you are turning is a four-lane 
road, you may enter it in the right lane if the 
right lane is free of traffic.

Multiple Left-Turn Lanes
Some streets may have more than one lane 
marked for left turns. If you are turning from
the left side, left-turn lane, enter the left lane
on the right of the yellow dividing line. If you
are turning from the right side, left-turn lane, 
enter the right lane.
Two-Way Left-Turn Lanes
Some streets have a center lane marked
as a two-way left-turn lane. Only enter this
lane when preparing to slow down or 
stop before making a left turn from the 
main roadway. Do not use this lane as 
travel lane (a vehicle may not travel in 
this lane for more than 500 feet), and 
do not use this lane when entering the 
roadway from a side street.
Roundabout Intersections
General Information
Roundabouts are a traffic control device that may 
be used as an alternative to signalized and all-way 
stop intersections. Statistically roundabouts are 
safer than traditional intersections because they 
reduce fatal and injury crashes by reduction of 
speeds and removing left-turns in front of
opposing traffic. A roundabout uses a circular
island in the center to control the flow of traffic 
through the intersection. Roundabouts feature
yield traffic signs at all entering roadway legs.
Yield control creates efficient traffic flow and
often less delay at the intersection. They reduce 
pollution and fuel use due to fewer stops and
hard accelerations. At a roundabout, drivers who 
approach the intersection make a slight right turn to 
go counterclockwise around a circular center island. 
The driver may then either exit the roundabout onto a different roadway, or 
continue on the same roadway. When approaching a roundabout, always 
yield to traffic in the circle, bicyclists, and pedestrians in the crosswalks. 
Approaching the roundabout:
•	 Slow down before entering the roundabout.
•	 For multi-lane roundabouts, observe roadside signs and pavement 
	
markings to direct you into the correct lane.
•	 Look to your left as you drive towards the entrance, yield to traffic 
	
already in the roundabout, bicyclists, and pedestrians in the crosswalk.
•	 Enter when there is a gap in traffic and merge with the other flow of 
	
vehicles. 
•	 NEVER make a left turn to enter a roundabout.
26

Traveling through a roundabout:
•	 Always stay to the right of the center island.
•	 Vehicles within the roundabout have the right of way.
•	 DO NOT stop within a roundabout unless it is the only way to avoid a 
	
crash.
•	 DO NOT change lanes within a roundabout. 
•	 Give special consideration to trucks, trailers and other large vehicles. 
	
They may need to utilize more than one lane within a roundabout. 
•	 DO NOT attempt to pass any vehicles especially large trucks.
•	 If you miss your exit, continue through the roundabout until you reach 
	
your appropriate exit. 
•	 When exiting, watch for pedestrians and bicyclists crossing the street.
Exiting the roundabout:
•	 Maintain a slow speed to avoid losing control or striking traffic islands.
•	 Use your right turn signal to let others know you are exiting.
•	 Do not accelerate until you are beyond the pedestrian crossing at the exit. 
Emergency Vehicles
Always yield to emergency vehicles. DO NOT enter a roundabout if an 
emergency vehicle is approaching. NEVER stop while inside a roundabout. 
If an emergency vehicle approaches while you are in the roundabout, exit 
immediately and pull to the right. 
Truck Apron
Large trucks need more space when driving in a roundabout. A truck apron, 
also known as off-tracking, is the paved area on the inside of the roundabout 
for the rear wheels of large trucks to use when turning. Truck aprons are not 
to be used by cars, SUVs or pickup trucks. 
J-Turn Intersections
The J-turn is an alternative to traditional 
roadway intersections on a four-lane 
highway. Instead of motorists crossing 
fast-moving lanes of traffic to get to the opposing lanes, drivers at a J-turn 
intersection turn right in the same direction of traffic, merge into the far left 
lane, and then make a left turn in the direction they intend to travel.
Local Ordinances
Local governments may make traffic ordinances in addition to laws made 
by the state. You must obey any traffic sign or regulation whether set by a 
municipality, county, or the state. Cities and towns may have regulations to 
do the following:
•   Set speed limits;
•   Set one-way streets;
•   Set stop signs at intersections;
•   Prohibit commercial vehicles from using certain streets;
•   Control parking by installing meters or by some other reasonable method;
•   Control turns; 
•   Require the use of turn signals, brake lights, and horns on all motor vehicles;
	
and/or
•   Prohibit the use of sound-producing warning devices.
27

Some things you should know when sharing the road with motorcycles:
•   Motorcycles are often overlooked by motorists.
•   It is not always easy to judge the speed or distance of a motorcycle.
•   On residential streets, especially those with parked cars, travel at or 
below the speed limit, depending on sight distance.
•   Motorcyclists change speed and lane position when encountering bad 
road conditions, such as manhole covers, diagonal railroad tracks, road 
debris, or in strong winds. Be ready to react.
•   You should not share a lane with a motorcycle. The motorcyclist needs 
the entire lane for safety reasons.
•   When you are passing, give motorcycles a full lane width. Do not 
squeeze past these road users. Wait for a clear stretch of road before 
passing a cyclist in a lane too narrow to share.
Safety Tips for Motorcycle Riders
•	 The law requires you to wear a helmet. Wearing a safety-certified helmet 
	
can prevent serious head injuries or death.
•	 Be sure your motorcycle is in safe condition and has all the equipment 
	
required by law.
•	 Make sure motorists see you. Wear bright colored clothes and stay out 
	
of a vehicle’s blind spots. Use proper lights and reflectors when riding 
	
after dark.
•	 Make sure you signal before you slow down, change lanes or turn. Before 	
	
merging, changing lanes, or turning, scan behind and in front to ensure 	
	
that it is safe to make this maneuver. Do so in plenty of time and in 	
	
	
cooperation with other drivers who will be affected by your move. If it is 	
	
not safe, continue on a straight course and scan repeatedly. Only move 	
	
once it is safe.
•	 Be careful when passing to the left of a parked or moving vehicle. You 
should leave three to four feet of clearance to avoid suddenly opened 
car doors or to allow for a vehicle to swerve.
•	 Be extra careful at intersections. Do not assume your right-of-way when 
	
there is a vehicle approaching. Be aware that motor vehicle drivers 
	
may not see you approaching the intersection, or may believe that you 
	
are moving at a slower speed than you are.
•	 Keep a steady line and be predictable as a courtesy to other traffic and 
	
to increase your personal safety.
Motorcycle Drivers Need a Driver License
To drive any motorcycle on the public streets, you must have a valid driver 
license with a motorcycle endorsement or a motorcycle license. 
Trucks are not large cars. Whether they are accelerating, braking, climbing 
a hill, switching lanes, or turning onto a side street, tractor-trailer trucks 
must perform certain maneuvers that drivers of automobiles do not.
28
Chapter 4 - Sharing The Road
Sharing The Road With Motorcycles
Sharing The Road With Large Trucks

29
A typical tractor-trailer combination, a power unit pulling a loaded semi-
trailer hinged to its rear end, may weigh up to 80,000 pounds. Depending 
on the trailer length, the total length of the combination may exceed 90 feet. 
On the busiest intercity routes, a motorist may encounter double or even 
triple-trailer combinations sometimes exceeding 100 feet in length.
Any motorist who has driven behind one of these trucks at a traffic light 
knows that a semi-trailer combination accelerates slowly. The truck may 
have to go through ten gears to reach the speed limit. The truck may have 
two- or three-times more power under the hood than a car does, but with up 
to 70,000 pounds of trailer and cargo behind it, a truck engine must move 30 
or 40 times more weight than a car engine. (Published with permission from 
John Deere Transportation Services, Sharing the Road, Deere & Co., 1996.)
To improve safety for all road users, please consider this information.
•	 Do not enter a roadway in front of a large vehicle. Avoid changing lanes 
in front of a large vehicle if you are turning off the roadway.
•	 If you are driving behind a truck or a bus and cannot see the driver in his 
or her rearview mirrors, the driver of that vehicle cannot see you.
•	 A truck or bus has blind spots on each side, in the rear and in the front 
where an automobile cannot be seen. These blind spots are referred to 
as the “No-Zone. ” Do not drive in the No-Zone except when absolutely 
necessary. You should not 
drive alongside large vehicles 
for prolonged periods at any 
time. Tailgating a truck is also 
dangerous.  Leave any large 
vehicle a cushion of safety.
•	 It takes longer to pass a truck. After you pass, make sure you can see 
the cab of the truck in your rearview mirror before reentering the lane.  
Maintain your speed and signal when reentering the lane. Do not slow 
down once you are in front of the truck.
•	 When traveling up or down steep grades, large vehicles must drive slowly 
in the right lane. Avoid driving your car in the right lane going up or down 
hills on divided or multi-lane roadways when interacting with large trucks. 
When you are near truck weigh stations, avoid driving in the right lane so 
slow-moving trucks can easily merge back onto the roadway.
•	 Vehicles carrying hazardous materials must stop at all railroad crossings. 
Be prepared.
•	 Because of their size, large trucks may swing out to the left as the first 
	
step in making a right turn. When following a tractor-trailer, observe its
	
turn signals before trying to pass.
•	 Tractor-trailers take longer to stop than cars traveling at the same speed.
	
The average passenger car traveling at 55 mph can stop in about 130
	
140 feet, almost half the length of a football field. A fully loaded tractor-
	
trailer may take almost 400 feet to come to a complete stop.
•	 Cutting off a truck in traffic or on the highway is particularly dangerous. If
	
you need to make a turn or lane change, take a moment to slow down
	
and turn behind the truck—it will only take you a few extra seconds.

•	 Never underestimate the size and speed of an approaching tractor-trailer. 	
	
Because of its large size, a tractor-trailer often appears to be traveling more
	
slowly than its actual speed. Car-truck collisions can occur at intersections 	
	
when the driver of the car does not realize how close the truck is or how 	
	
quickly it is approaching. 
As soon as you step out of your vehicle, you become a pedestrian. As 
a pedestrian, you should know your rights and responsibilities, and as a 
driver you should know the law when pedestrians are around.
As a pedestrian, you should know .  .  .
When you are facing a “Walk” signal or a green light, you have 
the right-of-way. You may begin to cross the road after you 
make sure all drivers see you and stop for you.
Do not begin to cross the street when you are facing a “Don’t 
Walk” signal or a red or yellow light. If the flashing “Don’t Walk” 
sign appears when you are crossing the street, you may finish 
crossing the street.
You should cross the road at an intersection or a crosswalk when:
•	 You are in a business district.
•	 You are between two closely spaced intersections with traffic lights.
Otherwise, you may cross the road in the middle of the block without a 
crosswalk being careful when stepping out between two parked vehicles.  
You must yield the right-of-way to all traffic when crossing in the middle of 
a block. Walk facing traffic when no sidewalk is available.
You should not stand in a traffic lane to speak to a driver for any length of 
time, as this could cause an crash. Instead, you should wait for the driver to 
pull over to a safe parking spot, and you should remain on the curb side of 
the vehicle.
As a Driver, You Should Know .  .  .
In some situations, pedestrians are required by law to yield to vehicles. 
In other situations, vehicles are required to yield to pedestrians. In all 
situations, whether the pedestrians are obeying the law or not, you must 
drive carefully, reduce your speed if needed, and do your best to avoid 
endangering pedestrians.
Even when you are facing a green light you must yield the right-of-way to 
all pedestrians in the intersection. Never assume you have the right-of-way. 
Do not assume pedestrians see you and will stop for you.
Do not pass a vehicle that has stopped or slowed down for a pedestrian.
Watch out for kids. Children will run out into the road without looking for 
traffic. So, be extra careful when you drive near schools, playgrounds, 
parks, or in residential areas. You must obey a slower speed limit in a 
school zone when lights are flashing or children are present. At a school 
crossing where there is a traffic patrol, stop and yield if a traffic patrol 
member signals you to do so.
30
Sharing The Road With Pedestrians

The following laws or rules also apply:
•	 Drivers must always yield the right-of-way to persons who are blind.  
When a pedestrian is crossing a street or highway guided by a dog or 
carrying a white cane (or a white cane with a red tip), vehicles must 
come to a complete stop.
•	 Drivers must yield when a pedestrian is in a marked or unmarked 	
	
	
crosswalk on or approaching their side of the road.  
•	 As you prepare for a right turn, especially on a red traffic signal, be 	 	
	
cautious of pedestrians (or bicyclists) approaching on your right. 
•	 Drivers should not block the crosswalk when stopped at a red traffic 		
	
signal. Drivers should not cross a sidewalk or crosswalk without first 		
	
yielding to pedestrians
Some things you should know when sharing the road with mopeds or bicycles:  
Most collisions with bicycles and mopeds happen at intersections, where 
smaller, slower bicycles and mopeds are especially easy to overlook. Scan 
carefully for bicycles and mopeds before proceeding through an intersection, 
giving them the same consideration you would any other vehicle.
•	 Bicycles are often overlooked by motorists.
•	 It is not always easy to judge the speed or distance of a bicycle.
•	 Crashes with wrong-way bicyclists frequently occur when a motorist
	
wants to turn right onto a main road and is only looking left for
	
approaching traffic. Be sure to look right and check for wrong-way 
	
bicyclists on the road or sidewalk before proceeding.
•	 On residential streets, especially those with parked cars, travel at or 		
	
below the speed limit.
•	 If you are following a bicyclist and need to make a right turn, slow down 	
	
and remain behind the cyclist until you are able to turn.
•	 Cyclists often travel at surprisingly fast speeds. If you need to make a 	
	
left turn, yield to oncoming bicyclists unless you are absolutely sure you 	
	
can make the turn before the cyclist reaches the intersection. 
•	 Bicyclists change speed and lane position when encountering bad road 	
	
conditions, such as manhole covers, diagonal railroad tracks, drain 	 	
	
grates, road debris, or in strong winds. Be ready to react.
•	 When you are passing, give bicycles and mopeds a full lane width. Do 	
	
not squeeze past these road users. The bicycle is generally a slow
	
moving vehicle and this may require you to slow down. Wait for a clear 	
	
stretch of road before passing a cyclist in a lane too narrow to share.
•	 Check for passing bicyclists before opening your car door into a traffic	
	
lane or bicycle lane.
•	 A bicycle lane is a portion of a roadway designated by striping to be used 
by bicycles. You may cross a bicycle lane when turning or when entering 
or leaving the roadway. You must yield to bicyclists in a bicycle lane.
Where to Ride Mopeds and Bicycles
On public streets and highways, you have the same rights and responsibilities
as a motor vehicle operator. Always ride with traffic, never against it. When 
operating at less than the posted speed or traffic flow, generally ride as 
31
Sharing the Road with Mopeds and Bicycles

32
near to the right side of the roadway as is safe. The right edge of the road 
often has hazards like ditches, gutters, sand, and gravel shoulders. Leave 
space between yourself and these hazards as needed for safety.
You may move more toward the middle or left of the lane or roadway, as 
appropriate when: 
•	 Making a left turn;	
•	 Avoiding hazards;
•	 The lane is too narrow to share with another vehicle; or
•	 There is a right-turn-only lane and you are going straight.
Always check traffic, and signal before changing lanes or changing your 
position within a lane. On a one-way street, bicyclists may also choose to 
ride as far left as is safe.
The law does not allow you to ride a moped on any part of the federal 
interstate highway system. 
Safety Tips for Moped and Bicycle Riders
•	 State law does not require you to wear a helmet. However, wearing a 
	
safety-certified helmet can prevent serious head injuries or death.
•	 Be sure your bike is in safe condition and has all the equipment required 
by law.
•	 Make sure motorists see you. Wear bright colored clothes and stay out 
of a vehicle’s blind spots. Use proper lights and reflectors when riding 
after dark.
•	 Make sure you signal before you slow down, change lanes, or turn. 
Before merging, changing lanes, or turning, scan behind and in front to 
ensure that it is safe to make this maneuver. Do so in plenty of time and 
in cooperation with other drivers who will be affected by your move. If it 
is not safe, continue on a straight course and scan repeatedly and only 
move once it is safe. In conditions of heavy traffic, less proficient bicyclists 
may find it easier to wait near the curb for a safe gap to appear.
•	 Be careful when passing to the left of a parked or moving vehicle. You 
should leave three to four feet of clearance to avoid suddenly-opened 
car doors or to allow for a vehicle to swerve.
•	 Be extra careful at intersections. Do not assume your right-of-way when 
	
there is a vehicle approaching. Be aware that motor vehicle drivers may 
	
not see you approaching the intersection, or may believe that you are
	
moving at a slower speed than you are.
•	 Keep a steady line, and be predictable as a courtesy to other traffic and
to increase your personal safety.
•	 For teen and adult bicyclists, studies show that riding on the street with
	
traffic, not against it (following the same traffic rules that other vehicles
	
do), is far safer than riding on the sidewalk.
Moped Drivers Need a Driver License
To drive any motorized bicycle such as a moped on the public streets, you 
must have a valid driver license. A motorized bicycle is defined as any two-
wheeled or three-wheeled device having an automatic transmission and 
a motor with a cylinder capacity of not more than 50 cubic centimeters, 
which produces less than three gross brake horsepower, and is capable of 
32

33
propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per 
hour on level ground.
Equipment Required on Mopeds and Bicycles
You do not have to register your moped or bicycle and it does not have 
to be inspected. However, Missouri law requires certain equipment on 
mopeds and bicycles.
Brakes — Your brakes must be able to stop you within 25 feet when 
traveling ten mph.
Lights and Reflectors — The number of bicycle-auto crashes rises 
dramatically between sunset and sunrise. Almost all such crashes can 
be prevented with proper bicycle lights and reflectors. You must have the 
following lights and reflectors when riding your bicycle from ½ hour after 
sunset until ½ hour before sunrise:
•	 A White Light on the front of your bicycle or carried by you that other 
	
drivers can see from 500 feet.
•	 A Rear Red Reflector, at least two square inches, or a Rear Red Light 
	
that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low beam 
	
headlights at 600 feet.
•	 Reflective Material or Lights on the pedals, crank arms, shoes, or 
lower legs that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low 
beam headlights at 200 feet.
•	 Reflective Material and/or Lights on Each Side of the Bicycle or 
bicyclist that drivers can see when reflected by their vehicles’ low beam 
headlights at 300 feet. This does not apply to mopeds that comply with 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Regulations.
Sharing the Road with Electric Bicycles
An electric bicycle as defined in 301. 010 RSMo is a bicycle equipped with 
fully operable pedals, a saddle or seat for the rider, and an electric motor 
of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one of the three 
classes:   
•	 Class 1:  Bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only 
	
when the rider is pedaling and that cease to provide assistance when the 
	
bicycle reaches the speed of twenty miles per hour.
•	 Class 2:  Bicycle equipped with a motor used exclusively to propel the 
	
bicycle and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle 
	
reaches the speed of twenty miles per hour.  
•	 Class 3: Bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only 
	
when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when 
	
the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty-eight miles per hour.  
Operation of an electric bicycle as defined by 301.010 RSMo does not 
require the rider to hold an operator license or motorcycle license.  
Funeral Processions
If you are driving a vehicle in a funeral procession, you should follow the 
vehicle in front of you as closely as is practical and safe. Every vehicle in 
the procession must use its flashing emergency lights. An organized funeral 
procession has the right-of-way at all intersections regardless of any traffic 
control device, except for emergency vehicles or when directed otherwise 
by law enforcement officials.

34
The following rules apply to all drivers not involved in an organized funeral 
procession.
•	 Do not drive between the vehicles that are part of the procession when
	
they are in motion.
•	 Do not join a funeral procession for the purpose of obtaining the right-of-way.
•	 Do not attempt to pass any vehicle in the procession except where a
passing lane has been specifically provided.
•	 Do not enter an intersection in which a procession is going through a
red signal light, unless you may do so without crossing the path of the
funeral procession.
Road Rage
Road rage is an uncontrolled display of anger by the operator of a motor 
vehicle (usually in response to another driver’s actions), which can result in 
property damage or personal injury.
Drivers prone to road rage are usually aggressive individuals who fail to 
follow courteous driving practices. Some examples of behavior associated 
with road rage include:
– 	Beeping the horn	
– 	Pursuing another vehicle
– 	Flashing the headlights	
– 	Making aggressive gestures
– 	Forcing another vehicle to pull over	
– 	Verbally abusing another driver
– 	Bumping into another vehicle	
– 	Tailgating another vehicle
– 	Threatening another driver	
– 	Braking or slowing suddenly
– 	Damaging a vehicle intentionally	
– 	Deliberate obstruction
– 	Assaulting another driver	
–	 “Cutting off” or swerving
As our society has become more accustomed to it, road rage has become 
a “normal” part of our driving environment. These habits can be unlearned, 
but it takes self discipline on the part of drivers.
When confronted with any of the behaviors associated with road rage, 
you should try to .  .  .
•	 Remain calm and do not react with similar behavior.
•	 Identify the location (for example: intersection, mile marker, direction the 	
	
vehicle was traveling, etc.).
•	 Get a physical description of the driver.
•	 Get a description of the vehicle (approximate year, make, model, color, 	
	
license plate number, etc.).
•	 Report the incident to the nearest local authorities as soon as possible.
•	 If you have a cellular phone, exit the roadway to a safe area and dial *55 	
	
(or 911 if you are in a metropolitan area).
Drunk Drivers
If you believe you have seen a drunk driver, tell the police immediately. 
You may be saving someone’s life. Helpful information to provide the officer 
includes the license plate number of the vehicle, a physical description of 
the car and driver, and the vehicle’s location.
About Littering
Littering is against the law.  It is unsightly and may cause a traffic crash. 
For example, a lit cigarette thrown out a car window can be blown into the 
vehicle behind you, causing property damage or personal injury.
If a judge finds you guilty of littering, you may have to pay up to a $1,000 
fine and/or spend up to one year in jail.

35
Chapter 5 - Parking
Drivers are responsible for making sure their vehicles do not become 
hazards after they have been parked. Whenever you park your vehicle, be 
sure it is in a place that is far enough from any travel lane to avoid interfering 
with traffic and visible to vehicles approaching from either direction.
•	 Always park in a designated area if possible.
•	 On one-way streets, you may normally park on either the right or left 	
	
side of the street.
•	 Always set your parking brake when you park. Leave the vehicle in 	 	
	 gear if it has a manual transmission, or in park if it has an automatic 		
	 transmission.
•	 Check traffic before you open the door. Get out of the vehicle on the 	
	 curb side if you can. If you have to use the street side, check traffic 	 	
	 before you get out. Always have passengers, especially children, exit 	
	 the vehicle on the curb side. Check for bicyclists, who often travel on 
	 the right-hand side of the travel lanes, near parked cars. Shut the door 
	 as soon as you can after getting out.
•	 Never leave the keys in a parked vehicle. Lock the doors whenever you 	
	 leave your vehicle if it will be out of your sight at any time.
•	 If you must park on a roadway, park your vehicle as far away from traffic 	
	 as possible. If there is a curb, park as close to it as you can.
•	 When you park on a hill, turn your wheels sharply towards 	 	
	
the side of the road. This way, if your vehicle starts to roll 	
	
	
downhill, it will roll away from traffic (refer to Parking on Hills).
No-Parking Zones
There are many areas where you cannot park. Check for signs that may 
prohibit or limit parking. Some parking restrictions are indicated by colored 
curb markings. Do not park:
•	 In an intersection.
•	 On a crosswalk or sidewalk.
•	 Across a driveway entrance.
•	 On the left side of a two-way street.
•	 Alongside a curb that is painted yellow.
•	 On a bridge.
•	 Blocking a fire hydrant.
•	 Blocking the normal traffic flow or creating a hazard to other drivers.
•	 With your vehicle facing against traffic.
When can you park in handicapped parking spaces?
Handicapped parking spaces may only be used when the vehicle displays a 
handicapped person placard or license plates, and a physically handicapped 
person is the occupant of the motor vehicle at the time of parking, or a 
physically handicapped person is being dropped off or picked up.

International Symbol of Access
This symbol marks spaces for vehicles operated by or used to 
transport people with handicaps. Violators, when convicted, 
shall be punished by a fine of no less than fifty dollars
($50) and no more than three hundred dollars ($300).
The law also provides that:
•   It is illegal to park in handicapped parking access aisles. 
•   It is illegal to use a handicapped person’s placard or license plates to 
park in designated handicapped parking spaces if the handicapped 
person is not being transported at the time.
Parking on Hills
Before leaving your parked vehicle:
•   Turn your wheels in the proper direction (see graphic below);
•   Turn off the motor, leaving the vehicle in proper gear;
•   Set the emergency or parking brake;
•   Remove the keys from the ignition;
•   Check your rearview mirror for traffic before stepping out; and
•   Lock it and pocket the keys.
Before you drive away from any parking space, be sure to check for traffic 
and signal.
Parallel Parking
•	 Stop even with the vehicle ahead of the parking space about 1½ feet to 
	
the left of that vehicle.
•	 Turn wheels sharply to the right, and back slowly into the parking space. Be 
sure the front of your vehicle does not block passing or oncoming traffic.
•	 When clear of the front vehicle, turn wheels sharply to the left and 	
continue backing.
•	 Turn wheels sharply to the right and pull forward toward the curb. Park in 	
the center of the parking space.
36

Good driving requires you to be observant and aware of your surroundings.  
You must look down the road, to the sides, and behind your vehicle. Be 
alert for unexpected events. Many crashes occur because drivers do not 
pay enough attention to their driving. Do not take your eyes off the road for 
more than a few seconds at any one time. For example, if you need to look 
at a map, pull safely off the road. Do not try to read the map while you are 
driving.
Drive in the Proper Lane
When driving on a highway with a total of two lanes (one lane in each 
direction), drive in the right hand lane. You may cross the center line for 
passing when there are no oncoming vehicles and no solid yellow line. 
On highways with a total of four or more lanes (two or more lanes in each 
direction), always keep to the right unless you are passing slower traffic, 
letting another driver have room to enter safely, or getting ready to make a 
legal left turn. 
Controlling Speed
The best way to control your speed is to know how fast you are going. 
Check the speedometer often, and pay attention to the posted speed limits.  
This is especially true when you leave high speed roads and begin driving 
on much slower local roads. 
Passing on Highways
Use the left lane only to pass another vehicle.  You can use the right 
lane when passing a vehicle that is making a left turn. Never use the 
shoulder or unpaved part of the highway to pass.
Before you pass a vehicle in front
of you, make sure you are in a safe
passing zone.  On four-lane highways, 
check the left lane for traffic by using your 
left and inside rearview mirrors and briefly 
looking over your left shoulder. Looking
over your left shoulder is important because 
it allows you to check for “blind spots.” 
Blind spots are the spaces you cannot see 
with your rearview mirrors. Do not drive in
another vehicle’s blind spot.
•   Try to avoid driving on either side and 
slightly to the rear of another vehicle.
	
Either speed up or drop back so the other
	
driver can see your vehicle more easily.
•   When passing another vehicle, get through the other driver’s blind 
spot as quickly as you can without exceeding the speed limit.  The 
longer you stay there, the longer you are in danger of having the vehicle 
collide with your vehicle.
37
Chapter 6 - Highway Driving

38
•	 Never stay alongside, or immediately behind, a large vehicle such 	
	
as a truck or bus. These vehicles have large blind spots and it is hard 	
	
for their drivers to see you. If you cannot see the truck driver’s face in 	
	
the truck’s side mirror, the truck driver cannot see you. It takes longer to 	
	
pass a truck. After you pass, make sure you can see the cab of the truck 	
	
in your rearview mirror before reentering the lane. Maintain your speed.  	
	
Do not slow down once you are in front of the truck.
If the way is clear, signal that you are changing lanes.  Pass the other 
vehicle quickly and smoothly, being careful not to exceed the speed limit. 
Give plenty of room to the vehicle you just passed.  Do not turn back into the 
right lane until you see the passed vehicle in your rearview mirror. Remember to 
look over your right shoulder to check your blind spot, and be sure to signal.
Being Passed
If another vehicle begins to pass you, stay in your lane and do not increase 
your speed. If many vehicles are passing you in the right lane of a multi-
lane roadway, you are probably going slower than the rest of the traffic.  
Unless you will be turning left soon, you should move into the right lane 
when the way is clear.
Adjusting to Traffic
Vehicles moving in the same direction and lane, and at the same speed 
cannot hit one another. Traffic crashes involving two or more vehicles often 
happen when drivers go faster or slower than other vehicles on the road.
If you are going faster than traffic, you will have to keep passing others.  
Each time you pass someone, there is a chance for a collision. The vehicle 
you are passing may change lanes suddenly, or on a two-lane road, an 
oncoming vehicle may appear suddenly. Slow down, and keep pace with 
other traffic. Speeding does not save more than a few minutes an hour.
Going much slower than other vehicles can be just as bad as speeding.  
It tends to make vehicles bunch up behind you and drivers then become 
impatient and pass you. If vehicles are piled up behind you, pull over and 
let them pass when it is safe to do so. 
Be Aware of the Traffic Around You
Check your rearview mirrors every few seconds to keep track of the 
approaching traffic. Make sure other drivers see you. Be sure to keep a safe 
distance (refer to Chapter 8) between you and the vehicle in front of you. 
Slow Moving Traffic
Some vehicles cannot travel very fast, or have trouble keeping up with the 
speed of traffic. If you spot these vehicles early, you have time to change 
lanes or slow down safely. Slowing suddenly can cause a traffic crash.
•	 Watch for large trucks and small, underpowered vehicles on steep 	 	
	
grades or when they are entering traffic. They can lose speed on long 	
	
or steep hills and it may take longer for these vehicles to get up to speed 	
	
when they enter traffic.

Stopping
Never stop on the highway itself. Many highways have rest stops and 
service areas. 
Be alert so that you know well ahead of time when you will have to stop. 
Stopping suddenly is dangerous. Braking quickly could cause you to lose 
control of your vehicle. You also make it harder for drivers behind you to 
stop without hitting you. Try to avoid panic stops by seeing events well in 
advance. By slowing down or changing lanes, you may not have to stop at 
all, and if you do, it can be a more gradual and safer stop.
You can stop on the shoulder of the highway in an emergency. If you do, 
alert other drivers by turning on your emergency flashers. It is also helpful 
to raise the hood, or tie a white cloth to the antenna.
Controlled Access Highways
Many highways have controlled access. This means you can enter or leave 
the highway only where there are entrance or exit ramps.
Entering The Highway
Entrance ramps are short, 
one-way ramps used to get 
on the highway. At the end 
of most entrance ramps is 
an acceleration lane. Use 
the ramp and acceleration 
lane to increase your speed 
to match the speed of the vehicles on the highway.
As you are speeding up, watch for an opening in the highway traffic. Switch 
on your turn signal, and pull smoothly into the traffic. DO NOT stop at the 
end of an acceleration lane unless traffic is very heavy and you have to 
stop.
Drivers already on the highway should give you room to enter, but if they 
don’t, do not force your way onto the highway. You must yield the right-of-
way to them, even if that means stopping at the end of an acceleration lane.
Leaving the Highway
Exit ramps are short, one-way ramps. At the beginning of most exit ramps 
is a deceleration lane. Make sure you are in the proper lane to leave the 
highway well in advance of the deceleration lane.
Use the deceleration lane and the exit ramp to slow down when leaving the 
highway. Be sure you obey the speed advisory sign on the exit ramp. Be 
ready to stop or yield at the end of the ramp.
If you miss your exit, DO 
NOT stop, back up, or try to 
turn around on the highway. 
You will have to get off the 
highway at the next exit and 
come back to the exit you 
missed.
39

Interchanges
Where two busy highways meet, there may be interchanges with entrance 
and exit ramps. An interchange can be confusing if you have not driven on 
it before. A Diverging Diamond Interchange, DDI, is a relatively new design 
that you may encounter while driving in Missouri. When driving through 
a DDI, you will travel on the left side of the roadway for a short distance. 
There are directional signs on all interchanges that can help you determine 
where you need to go.
Some Common Interchange Designs:
Watch Out for “Highway Hypnosis”
Highway hypnosis can make you feel sleepy and unaware of the traffic 
around you. Highway hypnosis is caused by the sameness of the road and 
traffic. The hum of the wind, tires, and engine also adds to the hypnosis.
You can avoid highway hypnosis by constantly moving your eyes and 
watching the traffic and highway signs around you. If you feel sleepy, pull 
off the highway. Do not risk falling asleep at the wheel.
Stop Driving When You Feel Sleepy
When you feel tired, it is harder to make decisions and to react to the traffic 
around you. You may fall asleep at the wheel. When you feel sleepy, pull 
off the highway at the nearest rest stop or service area. If you are really 
sleepy, take a nap. Tired drivers are a great danger to themselves, other 
drivers, and can be as dangerous as intoxicated drivers.
Emergencies
If your vehicle breaks down on a highway, make sure other drivers can see 
you and your vehicle. Traffic crashes occur because a driver did not see a 
stalled vehicle until it was too late to stop.
40
Cloverleaf                                       Diamond
Directional                                     Diverging Diamond

41
If possible, use a two-way radio, telephone, or cellular phone to notify 
authorities that your vehicle (or someone else’s) has broken down. Many 
roadways have signs that tell you the CB channel or telephone number to 
call in an emergency. The cellular number to call in an emergency is *55. If 
you are having vehicle trouble and have to stop, consider the following:
•	 If at all possible, get your vehicle off the road and away from traffic.
•	 Turn on your emergency flashers to show you are having trouble.  
•	 If you cannot get your vehicle off the roadway, try to stop where other 	
	
drivers have a clear view of your vehicle. Do not stop just over a hill or 	
	
just around a curve.
•	 Try to warn other drivers that your vehicle is there. Place emergency 	
	
flares behind the vehicle. This alerts other drivers to change lanes if 		
	
necessary. 
•	 Never stand in the roadway. Do not try to change a tire if it means you 	
	
have to be in a traffic lane. Lift the hood or tie a white cloth to the 	
	
	
antenna, side mirror, or door handle to signal an emergency.

Pavement Markings on the Road
Lines and symbols on the roadway indicate a number of things to drivers:  
where lanes are divided, where you may pass other vehicles, or change 
lanes, which lanes to use for turns, where pedestrian walkways are located, 
and where you must stop for signs and traffic signals.
Meanings of Pavement Markings
Lines	 — 	Broken Lines may be crossed in a passing maneuver.
	
— 	Solid Lines should not be crossed in a passing maneuver.
Colors	 — 	Yellow separates traffic traveling in opposite directions.
	
— 	White separates traffic traveling in the same direction.
Direction of Traffic
If the line on the left of you is yellow, the traffic on the other side of the line 
is moving in the opposite direction.
When the line on the left of you is white, the traffic is moving in the same 
direction. A solid white line marks the right edge of many roads.
The center marking for roads with 
four lanes consists of two solid 
yellow lines. The yellow lines tell 
you the traffic on the other side of 
the lines is moving in the opposite 
direction. You should never cross
the two solid yellow lines to pass.
No Passing Zones
Two-lane roads may have “no 
passing zones” marked with a 
solid yellow line. No passing 
zones are on hills or curves
where you cannot see far enough 
ahead to pass safely. You must complete passing before you enter the no 
passing zone.
When you see a solid yellow line on your side of the center line, do not try 
to pass. On any two-lane road, never pass if you cannot see the road is 
clear for the distance you need to make a pass, even if there is no marking 
on the roadway.
Left-Turn Lanes
Some roads have marked left-turn 
lanes. Notice the solid yellow lines 
and the thick yellow stripes in the 
illustration below.
Crosswalks and Stop Lines 
When required to stop because of a sign or signal, you must stop before 
your vehicle reaches the stop line or, if there is one, the crosswalk. 
42
Chapter 7 - Pavement Marking, Traffic Signs, and Signals
NO PASSING ZONE
NO PASSING ZONE

Crosswalks define the area where pedestrians are to cross the roadway. 
You must yield to pedestrians in or about to enter a crosswalk. Not 
all crosswalks are marked. Be alert for pedestrians when crossing 
intersections that do not have defined crosswalks.
Dual-Use Lanes
Dual-use lanes have both a turn 
arrow and a straight arrow. When 
both arrows appear on the electric 
traffic signal, you may either turn 
or go straight. But if you want to 
turn, and only the straight arrow is 
showing, you must wait for the turn 
arrow.
Shared Center Lanes
Vehicles moving in both directions may use these center lanes for making 
left turns (or U-turns when they are permitted). On the pavement, left-turn 
arrows for traffic in one direction alternate with left-turn arrows for traffic 
coming from the other direction. These lanes are marked on each side by 
a solid yellow and dashed yellow lines. Turn from this lane as soon as your 
path is clear.
No Lane Markings
When there are no signs or markings to control the use of lanes, there 
are rules that indicate which lane is to be used. These rules cover general 
driving, passing, and turning.
General Driving — In general, never back a vehicle in any travel lane. 
Drivers do not expect a vehicle to be backing towards them and may not 
realize it until it is too late. If you miss your turn or exit, do not back up. Go 
on to where you can safely turn around. Do not stop in travel lanes for any 
reason (confusion, breakdown, or letting out a passenger). Keep moving 
until you can safely pull off the road.
On a road with three or more lanes traveling in the same direction, stay in 
the right lane except to pass. If there is a considerable amount of traffic 
entering the right travel lane, then use the center travel lane.
Passing — On multi-lane roads, the left-most lane is intended to be used 
to pass slower vehicles. If you pass on the right, the other driver may have 
difficulty seeing you and might suddenly change lanes in front of you.  
Never pass on the shoulder. Other drivers will not expect you to be there 
and may pull off the road without looking.
Traffic Officers
You must obey traffic officers at all times. If you see a traffic officer giving 
directions, do what he or she says and ignore any traffic signs or signals. For 
example, if the officer signals for you to stop at a green light, you must stop.
Traffic Control Signals
Traffic controls include traffic signals, traffic signs and pavement markings.  
Traffic control also can be provided by law enforcement, highway personnel 
or school crossing guards. You must obey directions from these persons.
43

Traffic Signals
Traffic signals are lights that tell you when or where to stop and go.
Flashing Signal All Directions
Flashing traffic signals may occur during emergencies, night 
time and low traffic volume periods and special events. 
Flashing traffic signals have the following meanings:
•  	 A flashing red light means the same thing as a stop sign.
•  	 A flashing yellow light tells you to slow down and proceed 
	 with caution. 
A red light tells you to stop at the stop line, crosswalk, or before the 
intersection. Unless you are making a right turn, you must wait for
the signal to turn green before you proceed. After making a 
complete stop, you may turn right on a red light if the way is
clear of pedestrians and traffic. However, you must not turn right
on a red light when there is a “No Right Turn On Red” sign posted.
A steady yellow light tells you the traffic signal is changing from
green to red. Stop for a steady yellow light unless you are within 
the intersection or are so close that you cannot safely stop before 
entering the intersection.
A green light tells you that you can go through the intersection. 
However, you must first yield the right-of-way to traffic and 
pedestrians who are still in the intersection.
Left Turn Signals
When turning left at a green light, there are three types of
left-turn signal phases:
1.  Permissive — Vehicles are given a circular green or a 
flashing yellow arrow and required to wait for an adequate 
gap in the opposing traffic prior to making their turn.
2.  Protected — Vehicles may turn only when they receive a 
green arrow while opposing vehicles are stopped by a red 
light. 
3.  Protected/Permissive — Vehicles are given a protected 
phase (green arrow), or a permissive (circular green or 
flashing yellow arrow) phase, when drivers must choose
an adequate gap in opposing traffic.  
A steady red arrow tells you to stop at the stop line, crosswalk,
or before the intersection. You must wait for the signal to turn
green or a flashing yellow arrow before you proceed. However,
you may need to yield to pedestrians.
A steady yellow arrow appears after a green arrow. It tells
you the green arrow will be changing to a circular green light,
a flashing yellow arrow or a red light. You must be ready to 
yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic or to stop.
44

A flashing yellow arrow tells you that you are allowed to drive 
in the direction the arrow is pointing but are required to wait for 
an adequate gap in the opposing traffic prior to making your 
turn. You must yield to pedestrians.
A green arrow tells you that you can drive in the direction the 
arrow is pointing. You must be in the proper lane and the way
must be clear of all traffic and pedestrians.
Dark signals, or traffic signals that aren’t working operate as a four-way stop.
Traffic Signs
Traffic signs tell you traffic rules, hazards, where you are, how to get where 
you are going, and where services are located. The shape and color of 
these signs give clues to the type of information they provide.
Sign Colors
Sign Shapes
Octagon = Stop
Triangle = Yield
Vertical
Rectangle = Regulatory
Horizontal
Rectangle = Guide
Parks and Recreation
Pentagon = School
Round = Railroad
Crossbuck = Railroad
Pennant = No Passing
Zone
	 Diamond = Warning
White = Regulatory
Red = Stop, Yield,    	
        or Prohibited
Black = Regulatory
Yellow = Warning
Yellow Green = School
Orange = Construction
Green = Direction & Distance
Blue = Motorist Services
Brown = Public Recreation 	
	
	
& Cultural Interests
45

Warning Signs
These signs are yellow with black lettering or symbols and usually diamond 
shaped. These signs warn you to slow down and be prepared to stop if 
necessary because a special situation or a hazard is ahead. Some common 
warning signs are shown below. 
Traffic Control
Stop Ahead
There is a stop sign 
ahead on the road you 
are on. Be prepared to 
stop.
Signal Ahead
There is a traffic light 
signal ahead on the 
road you are on. Be 
prepared to stop.
School Crossing
Slow down. Watch for 
children crossing the 
road. Note: This sign 
is being transitioned 
to yellow green. This 
transition will take 
effect within the next 
ten years.
Pedestrian Crossing
Yield to pedestrians 
walking in the cross­
walk. Slow down.
Traffic Flow
Special Road and Traffic
46
EXIT
M P H
Exit Speed Advisory
The highway exit 
ramp has a speed 
advisory.
Added Lane
Traffic from another 
road will be entering 
the road. No merging 
is necessary because a 
lane has been added.
Begin Divided 
Roadway
The road will soon 
become two-way 
traffic divided by a 
median or barrier.
End Divided Roadway
Two-way traffic will no 
longer be divided by a 
median or barrier.
Merge
Traffic from another 
road will be entering 
the road. Be prepared 
for vehicles to move 
into your lane.
Lane Ends/Merge Left
Two lanes of traffic will 
soon become one lane 
of traffic. If you are in 
the right lane you must 
merge left, yielding to 
traffic driving in the left 
lane.

Turns and Curves In The Road
47
Large Arrow
May be seen on the outside of a 
turn. Slow down for sharp 	change 
of direction of 
travel.
Reverse Turn
Speed Advisory
Curve and turn signs 
have an advisory speed 
plate that shows the 
recommended speed 
for the curve or turn. 
Although you may feel comfortable 
driving at a higher speed in fair 
weather, you should never do so in 
rain, snow or icy conditions.
Curve
A curve sign is used to 
warn of a curve where 
the recommended 
speed is less than the 
posted speed limit for 
the highway.
Turn
A turn sign is used to 
warn of a sharp turn or 
turn where the
recommended
maximum speed is 30 
mph or less.
M P H
Chevron
May be used at curves 
and turns to add extra 
emphasis to slow 
down.
Special Road and Traffic Conditions
Slippery When Wet
The road ahead 
becomes unusually 
slippery in wet weather. 
Drive carefully in these 
conditions.
Object Marker
Are used to notify 
drivers of objects in 
the roadway or very 
close to the edge of 
the roadway. This 
sign emphasizes the 
need to not stray 
outside of the marked 
travel lane.
SO FT
SHOULDER
Soft Shoulder
The shoulder on the 
side of the road ahead 
is soft. Do not drive off 
the pavement.
Slow Moving Vehicle
A reflective orange 
triangle on the rear of 
a vehicle means it is 
traveling less than 25 
mph. You may see this 
sign on construction 
equipment or farm 
vehicles.
Bicycle - Share the 
Road
Watch for bicycle 
riders traveling in the 
same lane as vehicular 
traffic.
S HAR E
TH E
ROAD

48
Road Intersections
Regulatory Signs 
Many regulatory signs are square- or rectangular-shaped and are white, 
with black or red letters or symbols. They give you information about rules 
for traffic direction, lane use, turning, speed, parking, and other special
situations.
Some regulatory signs have a red circle with a red slash over a symbol.  
These indicate you cannot do something, for example, no left turn, or no
U-turn.
Other common types of regulatory signs are:
No Left Turn
No Trucks
No Bicycles
No Right Turn
No U-Turn
Intersection
Another road crosses 
the road. Watch
carefully for traffic 
crossing your path.
ROUNDABOUT
Side Road Ahead
Another road enters 
the road from the 
direction shown on 
the sign.
Roundabout Ahead
A roundabout intersection is ahead. Slow down as required 
by the speed restriction sign and follow the road rules for 
roundabouts.
T Intersection Ahead
The road you are
traveling does not 
continue. You must 
turn either right or left.
Side Road Railroad 
Crossing
A warning of a railway 
crossing very close to 
the intersection. Use 
caution when crossing 
tracks.

Stop
A stop sign is red with white letters and has eight sides. 
When you see a stop sign, you must come to a full stop.
You must wait until crossing vehicles and pedestrians
have cleared the intersection. You must stop at the stop line 
if one is present even if it is located past the stop sign. If 
there is no stop line, pull up and stop near the edge of the 
intersection, look both ways, and then proceed when it is safe.
a.	Stop before the 
	
stop line.
	
OR...
b.	Stop before the 
	
crosswalk.
	
OR...
c.	 If there is no 
	
stop line or
	
crosswalk,
	
stop before
	
entering the
	
intersection.
Yield 
A yield sign is triangular. It is red and white with red letters. 
It means you must slow down and yield the right-of-way to 
traffic in the intersection you are crossing or roadway you are 
entering. 
Wrong Way
You made a wrong turn and have entered a lane of oncoming 
traffic. As quickly and safely as possible, pull off the road, turn 
around and go back.
Do Not Enter 
When you see this sign at roadway openings, do not enter this 
road.
One Way
Traffic on some roadways and ramps is allowed in one 
direction only.
Lane Control
These signs use an arrow symbol to tell you which 
direction you can go from each lane. The signs are
along the road or hanging over the road. 
YI ELD
DO NOT
ENTER
ONE WAY
ONLY
ONLY
ONLY
49

50
Speed Limit
Speed limit signs indicate the maximum speed allowed by 
law, and do not mean that all parts of the road can be safely 
driven at those speeds under all conditions. The speed limit 
is the maximum allowable speed in ideal conditions. Adjust 
your speed for hills, curves, slippery roadways, limited sight 
distance, pedestrians, bicyclists, and slow-moving vehicles. 
These conditions may make the posted speed limit unsafe. By 
law, when conditions demand it, you must slow down. Interstate 
highways also have minimum speed limits. If this minimum speed is too fast 
for you, then you should use another route. You may not drive slower than 
40 mph on interstate highways under normal roadway conditions. 
Keep Right
Some roadway locations require traffic to pass only to the right 
side of a feature or obstruction.
Use the following guide unless posted speed limits direct otherwise. 
The speed limit in any city, town, or village is 25 mph, unless posted 
otherwise. The Missouri Highway and Transportation Commission has the 
authority to set speed limits higher or lower than the uniform maximum 
speed limits for safety reasons or to expedite the flow of traffic. There are 
more than 1,300 miles of interstate highways in Missouri. Their maximum 
speed limit is 70 mph. Lower speeds are posted on interstates for safety, 
usually in urban areas where interchanges and entering and exiting traffic 
are more frequent.
Railroad Crossing
Many railroad crossings have signs or signals to 
warn drivers. The round advance warning sign 
tells you that you are nearing a railroad crossing. 
Never try to beat a train across the tracks. Never 
start to cross the tracks until there is room for 
your vehicle on the other side of the tracks. It 
is not wise to shift gears when crossing railroad 
tracks, just in case your vehicle might stall. You may also see a pavement 
marking before a crossing. Like the round advance warning sign, pavement 
markings tell you that you are nearing a railroad crossing.
S P EED
LI M IT
70
M I N I M U M
40
Roadway	
Maximum Speed
Rural interstates and freeways	
	
70
Rural expressways	
	
65
Interstate highways, freeways or 
expressways within urbanized areas	 	
60
All other roads and highways not	
	

located in an urbanized area	
	
60
Lettered roads	
	
55
50

A white, X-shaped sign or “crossbuck” is
located at the railroad crossing. This sign
has the same meaning as a “yield” sign; 
therefore, you must yield to trains at 
crossings. The sign under the crossbuck
tells you how many tracks cross the road. 
At some crossings, along with the crossbuck 
sign, you will see side-by-side red lights that 
flash alternately. At some crossings there is 
also a crossing gate (some with a bell) that 
will lower when a train is coming. At both
of these signal-equipped crossings, you 
must stop and you cannot cross the tracks 
until the train has passed.
When you see any of these signs, SLOW DOWN, look for a train, and be 
ready to stop. You must STOP if the red lights are flashing or the gate is 
down. You must stop within 15 to 50 feet before the railroad tracks. DO NOT 
try to go around the gate.
The red lights may continue to flash after the train has gone by. If there are 
two or more tracks, look for a second train before you cross.
Work Zone Signs
Work zone signs are fluorescent orange and indicate some type of work is 
being performed on or alongside the roadway. Obey the work zone signs 
and be extremely careful when you see these signs. There may be other 
traffic control devices or flag persons to help direct you safely through the 
work zone.
If you are caught speeding or passing in a construction zone or work zone 
on Missouri state roadways, you could be fined a minimum of $250 for the 
first offense and a minimum of $300 for a second or subsequent offense in 
addition to any other fine authorized by law according to 
to Section 304. 582,RSMo.
The following are the most common work zone signs:
ROAD
WO R K
AH EAD
FRESH OIL
LOOSE 
GRAVEL 
R I G HT LAN E
CLOS ED
AH EAD
51

52
Types of Work Zones
There are several types of work zones that take place on Missouri 
roadways.  Knowing the difference between these work zones will help 
you understand what to expect when driving through them.  When driving 
through work zones, adhere to these precautions:
•	
Stay Alert! Look for reduced speed limits, narrow driving lanes, and  
highway workers
•	
Pay Attention. Do not drive distracted
•	
Obey the work zone signs
•	
Watch for vehicles entering and exiting the work zone
The following are the most common types of work zones a driver on 
Missouri roadways could encounter.
Shoulder Work Zone
This is work that takes place on the shoulder or beyond the shoulder.  You 
should use caution and perform or be alert of the following:
•	
Reduce speed when approaching the work zone
Typical Shoulder Work Setup
Lane Closure
This is work that takes place in the travel lane of a roadway. You should 
use caution and perform or be alert of the following:
•	
Merge to the designated lane or a lane that work is not being performed
•	
Reduce speed to the designated work zone speed limit 
Typical Lane Closure Setup
52

53
Flagging Operation
This is work that takes place on a two-lane, two-way roadway with one lane 
closed.  A flagger(s) will be present at the beginning and end points of the 
work zone providing traffic control to oncoming vehicles.  You should use 
caution and perform or be alert of the following:
•	
Be prepared to stop as you approach the work zone
•	
Follow the flagger’s instructions 
Typical Flagging Operation Setup
Typical Flagging Station Setup
Mobile Work Zone
This is work that takes place in the travel lane of a roadway. Workers may 
exit their vehicles briefly to conduct work. You should use caution and 
perform or be alert of the following:
•	
Multiple slow moving or stopped work 
vehicles
•	
Follow the directional guide of the Flashing 
Arrow Panel 
•	
Workers that may be on or near the roadway
When approaching the mobile work zone, a driver 
should expect to see a protective vehicle in the 
lane with a flashing arrow panel designating the 
correct lane to merge to. It will also be marked 
with a sign, usually stating “SLOW VEHICLES”.
53

54
Typical Mobile Work Zone Setup
Authorized Safety Inspection Station Sign
Guide Signs
These signs are square or rectangular, and are green or brown with white 
lettering. They show direction and distance to various locations such as 
cities, airports, and state lines, or to special areas such as national parks, 
historical areas, and museums.
Service Signs
These signs are square or rectangular, and are blue 
with white letters or symbols. They show the location
of various services, such as rest areas and hospitals.
Route Signs
The shape of route signs indicates the type of roadway: interstate, United 
States, state, or county. When planning a trip, use a highway map to 
determine your route. During the trip, follow the route signs. This will help 
you so you will not get lost.  
North-south routes are identified by odd numbers. East-west roads are 
identified by even numbers. Interstate highways that loop around cities are 
identified by three-digit even numbers. Roadways that direct traffic into a 
city’s road system (called “spurs”) are identified by three-digit odd numbers.
Understanding exit numbers is easy when you know interstates traveling 
west/east are numbered starting from the west and going east. This means 
exit numbers start at zero and increase as you drive east. Likewise, if you 
come from the east, the numbers will decrease to the west. Interstates that 
travel north/south have their exits numbered beginning at the south point 
and increasing north. If you enter the state from the north 
and drive south, then the exit numbers decrease.
Emergency Reference Markers
Emergency reference markers are mile markers placed 
along the outside shoulder to mark the edge of the roadway 
and convey information to drivers about their location on 
the interstate for navigation and emergency situations. The 
reference markers are located every two-tenths of a mile, 
so motorists will always be in sight of a sign. They tell the 
direction of travel and route number.
R EST
AR EA
I NTERSTATE
70
B U S I N ESS
LOO P44
A
NORTH
M I LE
1 0
.0
54

Use Seat Belts and Child Restraints
Before you drive, always fasten your seat belt(s) and make sure all your 
passengers are using seat belts or child restraints. Studies have shown that 
if you use seat belts, your chances of being hurt or killed in a traffic crash 
are greatly reduced.
Seat belts should always be worn with the lap belt low and snug across the 
hips and the shoulder belt across the chest. Shoulder belts should never 
be placed under the arm or behind the back. If your vehicle has a two-part 
seat belt system, be sure to wear both the lap and shoulder belt.
Seat belts should be worn even if your vehicle is equipped with air 
bags.  While air bags are good protection against hitting the steering wheel, 
dashboard, or windshield, they do not protect you if you are hit from the 
side or rear, or if the vehicle rolls over. An air bag will not keep you behind 
the wheel in these situations.  
An unrestrained or improperly restrained occupant can be seriously injured 
or killed by a deploying air bag. The National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration recommends drivers sit with at least ten inches between the 
center of their breastbone and the center of the steering wheel. Children 
12 and under should always ride properly restrained in a rear seat. Never 
put a rear-facing infant restraint in the front seat of a vehicle with a front 
passenger air bag.
If you need more information about child seat safety, contact: Department 
of Transportation, Highway Safety Division, website: modot. org/ phone: 
(800) 800-BELT.
Seat Belts — It’s The Law
Missouri law requires the operator and front seat 
occupants of all passenger vehicles to wear a 
properly adjusted and fastened seat belt. However, 
ALL passengers accompanying an intermediate driver 
license holder must be properly restrained.
Child Passenger Restraint Law
The law requires children of certain ages, weights and 
heights to be restrained by a child passenger restraint 
system, booster seat or safety belt when transported in 
any motor vehicle other than a public carrier for hire or school bus.
Age, Weight and Height Classifications
•  	Less Than Four Years Old — Children less than four years old, 
regardless of weight, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint 
system appropriate for that child.
•	 Less Than 40 Pounds — Children weighing less than 40 pounds,
	
regardless of age, shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system
	
appropriate for that child.
55
Chapter 8 - Safe Driving Tips For Everyday Driving 

56
•	 Less Than Eight Years Old or 80 Pounds or Under 4’9” — Children 	
	
at least four years of age but less than eight years of age, who also 		
	
weigh at least 40 pounds but less than 80 pounds, and are also less		
	
 than 4’9” tall shall be secured in a child passenger restraint system or 	
	
booster seat appropriate for that child.
•	 Children At Least Eight Years Old, Greater Than 80 Pounds or
	
Taller Than 4’9” — Children at least eight years old, at least 80 pounds 	
	
or children more than 4’9” tall shall be secured by a vehicle safety belt or 	
	
booster seat appropriate for that child.
For more information on the Booster Seat Law refer to the Department of 
Transportation website: https://www. modot. org/child-safety-seats.
Defensive Driving
To avoid making mistakes, or being in a crash because of someone else’s 
mistake, you must drive defensively. As a defensive driver you should:
•	 Keep your eyes moving. Notice what is happening ahead of you and on 
the sides of the road, and check behind you through your mirrors every 
few seconds. Pay special attention to oncoming vehicles. Many head-on 
collisions occur by distracted drivers crossing the center line.
•	 Expect other drivers to make mistakes, and think what you would do if a
	
mistake does happen. For example, do not assume that a vehicle 
	
coming to a stop sign is going to stop. Be ready to react if it does not 
	
stop. Never cause a crash on purpose, even if a pedestrian or another 
	
vehicle fails to give you the right-of-way.
•	 Do not rely on traffic signals or signs to keep others from crossing in 	
	
front of you. Some drivers may not obey traffic signals or signs. At an
	
intersection, look to the left and right, even if other traffic has a red light 	
	
or a stop sign.
Proper Posture While Driving
The way you sit and hold the steering wheel affects your driving. Good 
posture can help you stay alert and in full control of your vehicle.  
•	 Sit with your back straight, upright, and relaxed against the seat.
•	 Move your seat close enough so you can easily reach the pedals but 	
	
far enough away that your elbows are in front of you when you hold the 	
	
steering wheel. 
•	 Keep both feet within reach of the floor controls.
•	 Keep both hands on the steering wheel.
Steering
Use a proper grip. Place your left hand between the seven & nine o’clock 
positions and your right hand between the three & five o’clock positions on 
the steering wheel. This position is comfortable and allows you to make 
most turns without taking your hands off the wheel.
Look well down the road, not just at the road in front of your vehicle. Look for 
traffic situations where you will need to steer or slow before you get to them.
When turning corners, turn the steering wheel using the hand-over-hand 
technique. Do not turn the wheel with just the palm of one hand, because 
you could lose control. When you complete a turn, straighten out the 
steering wheel by hand. 

57
Steering Wheel Locking Device — Never turn your vehicle’s ignition key 
to the “lock” position while your vehicle is still in motion. This will cause the 
steering wheel to lock if you try to turn the steering wheel, and you will lose 
control of your vehicle.
Following Other Vehicles
Be sure to keep a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front 
of you. You need a safe distance to stop or turn to avoid a crash. Rear-end 
crashes are very common. They are caused by drivers who follow too closely 
and cannot stop in time when the vehicle ahead suddenly stops.
Three Second Rule
A good way to measure your safe following distance is to use the “three 
second rule.” Choose an object near the road ahead, like a sign or 
telephone pole. As the vehicle ahead of you passes it, count slowly, “one- 
thousand one, one-thousand two, one-thousand three.” If you reach the 
object before you finish counting, you are too close to the vehicle ahead.
Space Behind
It is not always easy to maintain a safe distance behind your vehicle. 
However, you can help keep the driver at a safe distance by keeping a 
steady speed, and signaling in advance when you slow down. Follow these 
safety tips:
•   Try to find a safe place out of traffic to stop and pick up or let off passengers.
•   If you want to parallel park and there is traffic coming behind you, put on 
your turn signal, pull next to the space, and allow vehicles to pass before 
you park. 
•   When you have to drive so slowly that you slow down other vehicles, pull 
to the side of the road when it is safe to do so, and let them pass. There 
are turnout areas on some two-lane roads you could use. Other two-lane 
roads sometimes have passing lanes.
•   If you are followed too closely or “tailgated” by another driver, and there 
is a right lane, move over to the right. If there is no right lane, wait until
the road ahead is clear and then reduce speed slowly. This will encourage
the tailgater to drive around you. Never slow down quickly to discourage 
a tailgater. This will only increase your risk of being hit from behind.
Space To The Side
You need space on both sides of your vehicle to have room to turn or 
change lanes.
•   Avoid driving next to other vehicles on multi-lane roads. Someone may 
crowd your lane or try to change lanes and pull into you. Move ahead or 
drop behind the other vehicle.
•   Keep as much space as you can between yourself and oncoming 
vehicles. On a two-lane road, this means not crowding the center line. In 
general, it is safest to drive in the center of your lane. 
•   Make room for vehicles entering on a multi-lane roadway. If there is not 
a vehicle in the lane next to you, move over a lane.
•   Keep extra space between your vehicle and parked vehicles. Someone 
could step out from a parked vehicle, from between vehicles, or a parked 
vehicle could pull out.
57

•   Give extra space to pedestrians or bicyclists, especially children. They 
may move into your path quickly and without warning. Wait until it is safe 
to pass.
•   When possible, take potential hazards one at a time. For example, if you 
are overtaking a bicycle and an oncoming vehicle is approaching, slow 
down and let the vehicle pass first so you can give extra room to the 
bicycle.
Stopping Distance
Your stopping distance equals your reaction distance plus your braking 
distance. If you are driving fast, are very tired, or if your vehicle has bad 
brakes, you will need more space to stop your vehicle.
The following distance equals your reaction distance plus your vehicle’s 
braking distance at different speeds. The reaction distance is the distance 
you travel after you see a danger and before you apply your brakes. In the 
chart shown below, the reaction distance is for 1.5 seconds. You have to 
be alert to react within one and one-half seconds.
The braking distance is the distance you travel after you apply your brakes 
and before your vehicle comes to a stop. In the chart shown below, the 
braking distance is for a vehicle with good brakes and tires, in good 
weather and on a good road.
Average Stopping Distance of Cars on Dry Level Pavement
Letting Others Know What You Are Doing
Generally, other drivers expect you to keep doing what you are doing. You 
must warn them when you are going to change direction or slow down.  
This will give them time to react to what you do.
Signal When You Change Direction
You should use your turn signals before you change lanes, turn right or left, 
merge into traffic, or park.
•   Get into the habit of signaling every time you change direction. Signal 
even when you do not see anyone else around. It is easy to miss 
someone who needs to know what you are doing.
•   Signal as early as you can. Try to signal at least 100 feet before you 
make your move. If there are other streets, driveways, or entrances 
between you and where you want to turn, wait until you have passed 
them to signal.
•   If another vehicle is about to enter the street between you and where 
you plan to turn, wait until you have passed it to signal your turn. 
58

59
•   After you have made a turn or lane change, make sure your turn signal 
is off. After small turns, the signal may not turn off by itself. Turn it off if 
it has not clicked off by itself. If you do not, other drivers might think you 
plan to turn again.
Using Your Horn
Do not use your horn unless you have to. Needless use of your horn may 
distract other drivers and cause a traffic crash. There is only one reason 
to use your horn: to warn other drivers. Your horn should not be used as a 
display of anger or frustration.
“Slow Poke” Driving
It is against the law for you to drive slower than the posted minimum speed 
under normal driving conditions. You may drive more slowly than the minimum 
speed if you are driving in bad weather, heavy traffic, or on a bad road.
If there is no posted minimum speed, it is still against the law for you to 
drive so slowly that you block traffic. If you have to drive more slowly, and 
vehicles line up behind you, pull over and let them pass. Many crashes are 
caused by slow drivers who block other traffic. Remember, slower is not 
always safer.
Carbon Monoxide
Beware of carbon monoxide poisoning. Vehicle motors give off carbon 
monoxide which is a deadly gas. To avoid carbon monoxide poisoning:
•	 Do not leave the motor running in a garage.
•	 Do not leave the motor running and windows closed when you park your 	
	
vehicle.
•	 Do not use the heater or air conditioner in a parked vehicle with the 		
	
windows closed.
•	 Do not leave the vents open when following closely behind another vehicle.
•	 Do not drive with a defective muffler or exhaust system.
Tips For Avoiding a Deer-Vehicle Crash
You can reduce your odds of being involved in a deer-vehicle crash by 
applying these precautionary measures:
•	 Be especially alert and use caution when traveling through areas marked 	
	
with deer crossing signs.
•	 Deer seldom travel alone. Chances are if you see one deer crossing a road 	
	
or notice a struck deer on the side of the road, there are others nearby.
•	 Be especially cautious in areas around fields, streams, and gardens where 	
	
deer tend to congregate.
•	 Most deer-related crashes occur in January, May, and October through 	
	
December.  
•	 Highest-risk periods are from sunset to midnight and the hours shortly 	
	
before and after sunrise.
•	 After dark, use high beams when there is no opposing traffic. High 	 	
	
beams will illuminate the eyes of deer on or near a roadway and provide 	
	
greater motorist reaction time.  
•	 To reduce the likelihood of serious injury in a crash, be sure all vehicle 	
	
occupants wear seat belts and children are properly restrained in child 	
	
safety seats.

60
•	 If you see that a crash is unavoidable, do not swerve. Swerving off the 	
	
road or into the path of an oncoming car can increase the risk of injury.	
•	 Make sure there is no traffic behind you before slowing suddenly. Too 	
	
much brake pressure can cause the front end of the vehicle to drop 	 	
	
down, striking the deer in the legs and allowing the body to come into
	
the passenger compartment of the vehicle.  
•	 If you are involved in a crash:
	
○Report the crash to a local law enforcement agency;
	
○Obtain a police report (if required) to file a claim for coverage with 	
	
your insurance company; and
	
○Contact a local Missouri Department of Conservation agent to report 	
	
where the crash occurred. This can help to identify frequent deer 		
	
crossing areas.
Tire Pressure
Prior to entering the vehicle, check the tire pressure using the recommended 
PSI (pounds per square inch) located in the vehicle owner’s manual or the 
driver’s side door jam of the vehicle. Use a tire pressure gauge to check 
your psi. If your psi is above the number listed in the owner’s manual or on 
your door jam, let air out until it matches. If below, add air (or have a tire 
professional help you) until it reaches the proper number.
You may measure tread depth using the penny test. Once every month, or 
before you embark upon a long road trip, check your tires for wear and
damage problems. An easy way to check for wear is by using the penny test.
•	
Take a penny and hold Abraham Lincoln’s body between your thumb 	
	
and forefinger.
•	
Select a point on your tire where the tread appears to be lowest and 		
	
place Lincoln’s head into one of the grooves.
•	
If any part of Lincoln’s head is covered by the tread, you’re driving with 
	
the safe amount of tread. If your tread gets below that, (approximately 
	
2/32 of an inch) your car’s ability to grip the road in adverse conditions 	
	
is greatly reduced.
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law Enforcement
Law enforcement officers conduct traffic stops because they observe a 
traffic violation or are conducting a police investigation. Being stopped by a 
law enforcement officer can be a stressful experience but knowing what to 
do during the stop will help ensure your safety, the safety of other motorists, 
and the safety of the officer.
When you see emergency lights behind you, stay calm, activate your turn 
signal, and pull off or to the side of the roadway as soon and safely as
possible. Turn off the ignition and radio, and stay in your vehicle unless
directed by the officer to exit. Keep your hands on the steering wheel so 
they are easily observable. Ask your passengers to remain calm and to 
stay in the vehicle while keeping their hands in plain view as well. Give the 
officer your full attention. Cell phones and mobile devices should not be 
used by you or any of your passengers. Do not make sudden moves or 
search for your driver’s license or vehicle documents – wait for the officer 
to give you instructions. If you have a weapon(s) in the vehicle, inform the 
officer upon first contact.

61
If it’s nighttime, the officer may direct a spotlight at your vehicle once 
stopped. To assist with visibility, turn on your interior lights as soon as 
you stop to help the officer see inside your vehicle.
The officer will usually explain why they stopped you and may ask you
questions about your trip. If the officer isn’t in uniform they will show you 
their law enforcement credentials or you may ask to see them. Follow all 
instructions the officer gives you or your passengers. The officer may ask 
to see your driver license, proof of insurance, and vehicle registration. If the 
documents are out of your reach, tell the officer where they are before you 
reach for them. If you have questions, politely ask for clarification. If the
officer asks you to exit the vehicle, stay safely away from traffic and keep 
your hands in plain view.
When the officer completes their interaction with you they may issue a 
warning or a traffic ticket which may include a fine. The officer will typically 
explain whatever action is being taken. If you have questions, respectfully 
ask the officer to clarify. If you disagree with the officer’s decision to issue a 
traffic ticket, don’t prolong the contact by arguing with the officer. If you wish 
to contest the ticket, you will have the opportunity to explain your point of 
view of what happened in court. Your acceptance and signature on a traffic 
ticket is not an admission of guilt; however, the refusal to sign a traffic ticket 
may result in your arrest. If you believe the officer acted inappropriately, 
document the officer’s behavior and report it to the officer’s agency in a 
timely manner. The name of the officer and law enforcement agency will be 
on the ticket or you may ask the officer to provide this information.
The enforcement of traffic laws is an effective tool in changing unsafe
driving behavior and reducing crashes. If you receive a warning or a ticket 
for a traffic violation, its purpose is to deter illegal and/or unsafe behavior. 
Good communication from all involved parties can make a traffic stop a safe 
experience for all parties involved. 
If you are the subject of a traffic stop, you have legal rights created by the 
Constitution and the law. These include the right to be free from unreasonable 
search and seizure, the right to be free from being forced to incriminate 
yourself, which is commonly referred to as the right to remain silent, and the 
right to an attorney. Please consult an attorney licensed to practice in the 
State of Missouri if you have questions about these and other rights.
61

62
Night Driving
Driving at night is more difficult than driving during the day. Headlights do not let
you see as far ahead as you can in daylight, and limit your view of the sides 
of the road. The glare of oncoming headlights makes seeing the road more 
difficult.
For driving at night, you should:
•	 Make sure your windows are clean.
•	 Turn your headlights on from ½ hour after sunset until ½ hour before sunrise.
•	 Make sure your headlights are clean and working well. Have them 	 	
	
checked from time to time for correct aim.
•	 Use your high beams when there are no oncoming vehicles.
•	 Do not overdrive your headlights. Your headlights only let you see about 	
	
350 feet ahead. Be sure you are driving slow enough to stop or turn if 	 	
	
needed.
•	 Use your low beams when you come within 500 feet (about one block) 
of an oncoming vehicle. Also use your low beams when following 
another vehicle within 300 feet.
•	 Slow down when nearing a curve if you are driving the maximum posted 	
	
speed limit.
•	 Use the edgeline as a guide. If there is no edgeline, use the center line 	
	
to guide you.
•	 Stay awake and alert. Do not drive if you feel tired.
•	 Watch carefully for highway signs, as they are harder to see at night.
•	 Watch carefully for people and vehicles stopped on the side of the road.
Headlight Use
You must use your headlights any time weather conditions require the use 
of your windshield wipers.
Winter Driving
In winter, clean all snow and ice off your windows, headlights, and taillights. 
Be sure your windshield wipers and defroster are working. No matter how 
far you are going to drive, never start driving until all snow and ice is off 
your windows.
Your vehicle should have tires that are rated for driving in snow. If you do 
not have tires that are rated for driving in snow, you should have chains 
ready to put on your tires during bad weather. But even if you have “snow” 
tires or chains, you cannot drive safely on snow or ice at normal speeds. If 
there is snow or ice on the road, slow down and do not use your vehicle’s 
cruise control system. When starting on snow or ice, start slowly and 
smoothly. If your tires start to spin, try clearing a path by driving backwards 
and forwards a few times. If that does not help, spread some abrasive 
material like salt, sand, or cat box litter around your wheels. NEVER let 
anyone stand in line with your wheels. Your wheels may throw up gravel or 
ice and cause an injury.
Chapter 9 -  Safe Driving Tips for Special Driving Conditions

Once you have started, try to get the feel of the road. Gently brake while 
driving to see how slippery the road is and then adjust your speed for the 
road conditions.
It will take longer to stop your vehicle when driving on snow or ice. So be 
sure to leave a safe distance, about eight to ten seconds, between your 
vehicle and any vehicle ahead of you.
When you want to slow down or stop, apply the brakes gently and 
smoothly. Never slam on your brakes — this may cause you to skid. On 
very slippery surfaces, pump the brakes by gently pushing down and letting 
up on them several times. If your vehicle is equipped with an anti-lock 
brake system, refer to your owner’s manual for proper braking techniques 
in special situations.
Remember that bridges and overpasses will freeze and become slippery 
before other parts of the road, and be aware that even on cleared roads a 
few ice patches may still exist.
If you have a four-wheel drive vehicle, do not use the four-wheel drive on 
ice. Four-wheel drive vehicles can easily overturn on ice. If you hit an icy 
patch in four-wheel drive, take your foot off the accelerator.
Remember, Ice and Snow. . . . Take it SLOW!
Wet Pavement
When it starts to rain, water mixes with the dust and oil on the road to 
form a slick, greasy film. Fallen leaves can also become slippery. The wet 
pavement may make it harder for you to stay on the road on curves. It will 
also take longer to stop your vehicle. So be sure to slow your speed and 
leave a safe distance between your vehicle and the vehicle in front of you.  
Do not use your vehicle’s cruise control system on wet pavement. The 
cruise control system will continue to provide power to the tires if you lose 
traction and may cause you to lose control.
Hydroplaning
On wet pavement, your tires may ride on the water rather than the 
pavement. This is known as “hydroplaning” and it refers to loss of traction 
and control. Hydroplaning can happen at any speed over 35 mph. In a 
severe rainstorm, the tires can lose all contact with the road at 55 mph.
If you think your tires are hydroplaning, take your foot off the accelerator 
and slow down. Do not hit the brakes as this may cause you to skid.
To avoid hydroplaning:
•	 Have good tires with deep treads on your vehicle.
•	 Keep tires properly inflated.
•  	Slow down during rainstorms or when the pavement is wet.
•	 Do not use your vehicle’s cruise control system.
Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS)
Four-wheel ABS is a safe, effective braking system when used properly. 
It offers an important safety advantage by preventing the wheels from 
locking during emergency braking situations. If your car is equipped with 
ABS, you should be aware that under hard braking you may feel a pulsing 
63

64
in the brake pedal. Do keep your foot on the brake. Maintain a firm and 
continuous pressure on the brake while steering to enable the four-wheel 
ABS to work properly. 
Remember, if your vehicle is equipped with anti-lock brakes don’t:
•	 Pump your brakes, 
•	 Forget to steer,
•	 Be alarmed by mechanical noises and/or slight pedal pulsations.
These conditions are normal and let you know the ABS is working.
Skidding
Handling a skid is the same for front-wheel and rear-wheel drive vehicles.  
Take your foot off the accelerator, but DO NOT hit the brakes.
•	 Gently turn your steering wheel in the direction that your rear wheels are 	
	
sliding.
•	 Be careful not to brake or turn sharply. Hitting the brakes or jerking the 	
	
steering wheel will only make the skid worse.
Steer Into The Skid
	
1.	 Before	
2.	 Rear	
3.	 Turn	
4.	 Vehicle
	
	
Skid	
	
Wheels	
	
Front	
	
Straight
	
	
	
	
Slide	
	
Wheels	
	
Again
	
	
	
	
To Right	
	
To Right
Fog
It is very dangerous to drive in fog. If you must drive in fog, you should:
•	 Reduce your speed.
•	 Be alert and ready to stop.
•	 Keep your headlights on low beam. In fog, you will see less if your lights 	
	
are on high beam.
•	 If the fog becomes so thick you cannot see, pull off the road and stop. 	
	
Leave your lights and emergency flashers on.
Handling Vehicle Emergencies
The most important rule in any emergency is do not panic. If you stay 
calm, you will remember what you should do. If you have power steering or 
a locking steering wheel, never turn off the ignition key until you have come 
to a full stop.
Brake Failure: If your brake pedal suddenly sinks to the floor:
•	 Pump the brake pedal fast and hard several times. If that does not work...
•	 Use your emergency or parking brake, but use it gradually.
•	 Shift to a low gear and look for a place to slow to a stop.
•	 Make sure your vehicle is off the road.
•	 After the vehicle has stopped, call for help. Do not try to drive to a garage.

65
Tire Blowout: If you have a tire blowout, you may hear a loud “bang” then 
“thump, thump, thump.” The steering wheel may jerk, and you may lose 
control of your vehicle.
•	 Hold the steering wheel tightly.
•	 Take your foot off the accelerator, but do not hit the brakes.
•	 Let your vehicle slow to a stop completely off the road.
•	 Apply the brakes when the vehicle is almost stopped.
•	 Turn on your emergency flashers.
•	 Change the tire only if you can do so without placing yourself in danger.
Running Off the Pavement: If your wheels run off the paved edge of the 
road, the wheels may pull to the right:
•	 Hold the steering wheel tightly.
•	 Take your foot off the accelerator, but do not hit the brakes. Only apply
	
gentle brake pressure, if necessary.
•	 When the vehicle has slowed and you have control of your vehicle, turn 	
	
back onto the pavement if the lane is free of traffic.
Steering Failure: If your vehicle does not turn when you turn the wheel:
•	 Take your foot off the accelerator.
•	 Let your vehicle slow down by itself. Do not hit the brakes until your 
vehicle has almost stopped, or unless you have to.
•	 Turn on your emergency flashers.
Headlight Failure: If your vehicle’s headlights go out:
•	 Try the dimmer switch or headlight switch, that might turn them on again. 	
	
If that does not work...
•	 Put the parking lights, emergency flashers, or turn signals on.
•	 Pull off the road, but leave the emergency flashers on.
Stuck Accelerator: If your accelerator becomes stuck, you should:
•	 Shift to neutral;
•	 Apply the brakes;
•	 Keep your eyes on the road;
•	 Look for a way out;
•	 Warn other drivers by honking and flashing your emergency lights;
•	 Try to drive the car safely off the road; and
•	 When you no longer need to change direction and have stopped, turn
	
off the ignition. (Turning off the key locks the steering wheel of many 
	
vehicles.)
Blocked Vision: If your hood suddenly flies open, your windshield wipers 
fail, or something else blocks your vision:
•	 Roll down the window so you can look around whatever is blocking your 
view.
•	 Turn on your emergency flashers.
•	 Pull your vehicle off the road.
Vehicle Approaching Head-On In Your Lane:
•	 Slow down.
•	 Pull over to the right and sound your horn.
•	 DO NOT swing over into the left lane. The other driver may pull back 
over into that lane, too.

66
Stalling On Railroad Tracks:
If a train is approaching:
•	 Unfasten your seat belt, get out of your vehicle, and off the tracks.
•	 Run in the direction the train is coming from. (If you run in the direction 
the train is heading, you may be hit with debris when the train hits your
vehicle.)
If there is no train in sight:
•	 Roll down your windows and listen for the train.
•	 Try to start the engine. If that fails...
•	 Put your vehicle in neutral and push it off the tracks.
12 and 15 Passenger Van Safety:
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has determined that 12- 
and 15-passenger vans are inherently unstable when loaded to the level for 
which they are designed, carrying more than ten passengers. The NTSB 
recommends that all drivers of 12- and 15-passenger vans obtain specific 
training on the handling and operation of these types of vehicles. For more 
information regarding 12- and 15-passenger van safety, you may visit the 
NTSB’s website at http://www. ntsb. gov/Pages/default. aspx.

67
Driving a motor vehicle is a privilege. It takes skill and common sense. 
Alcohol, drugs, or fatigue will cause your driving to suffer, and it is your 
responsibility to know when you are not in shape to drive. Driving under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs, even medicine, or driving when you’re tired 
can have deadly consequences — for you, your passengers, and other 
motorists.
Drinking and driving is not worth the risk to your life and the lives of others. 
Even a small amount of alcohol may affect your driving ability. If you are 
going to drink, let someone else drive who has not been drinking.
Missouri laws are tough if you are found guilty of drinking or using drugs 
while driving. You may pay a fine, lose your license, and even go to jail.
If you injure or kill someone because you were drinking or using drugs 
while driving, you may:
•  	Spend two to seven years in jail;
•  	Pay a $5,000 fine; and/or
•  	Lose your driver license for five years.
When a police officer stops you and suspects you have been drinking, the 
officer may ask you to take some tests like walking heel to toe, or standing 
on one leg. These tests will help the officer decide if you should be arrested 
and have a chemical test of your breath, blood, or urine. The result of this 
test is known as your Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) level.
Administrative Actions
If your BAC level is .08% or more (or for minors .02% or more), the officer 
will take your license away and give you a notice.  This notice tells you 
that your license will be suspended or revoked (and you will not be able 
to legally drive) after 15 days. The notice includes a 15-day driving permit 
that you can use if the officer indicates this on the notice. The notice also 
allows you to request a hearing or, if eligible, request an immediate 90-day 
Restricted Driving Privilege (RDP). If you are given a hearing, you may 
continue to legally drive until 15 days after a decision is mailed to you.
There are two types of actions that may be taken against you for driving 
when you are not fit to drive. There are administrative actions and court 
convicted actions, which carry different penalties. 
Chapter 10 - Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving

68
The following chart shows the administrative actions that you can expect to 
face if you are arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
*Ignition Interlock Device (IID) installation required for reinstatement. 
Court-Convicted Actions
If you receive a ticket, and a judge finds you guilty of Driving While 
Intoxicated (DWI) or Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) of .08% or more, you will 
not be able to legally drive after the ticket is sent to the Department.  Your 
license will be suspended, revoked, or denied based on your past driving 
record,and the points will be added to your record. You will be notified by 
mail when you must stop driving. The chart below shows the consequences 
of a court convicted action like DWI or BAC: 
License 
Suspension
1st Offense *2nd Offense
License 
Revocation
*2nd Offense within a 5-year
period - One-year license revocation
Please see 
Page 71
 for 
Reinstatement 
Requirements
Administrative	
Driver License Suspension/	
To Get Your
Action	
Revocation/Denial	
License Back
	
	
Driver License	
To Get Your
Crime	
Fines/Jail	
Suspension,	
License Back
	
	
Revocation or Denial
BAC
Driving/
operating a 
vehicle with 
.08% Blood 
Alcohol 
Content or 
more
and/or
DWI
Driving 
While 
Intoxicated.
1st Offense - Spend 
up to six months in jail. 
Pay up to a $500 fine. 
2nd Offense - Spend 
up to one year in jail. 
Pay up to a $1,000 fine. 
3rd Offense - Spend 
up to four years in jail. 
Pay up to a $5,000 
fine. 
4th Offense - Spend 
up to seven years in 
jail. Pay up to a $5,000 
fine.
5th Offense -
Spend between five 
and 15 years in jail.  
1st Offense -
90 day suspension
•	You may be eligible for a 
	 90-day or 60-day Restricted 
	 Driving Privilege.
*2nd Offense - One-year 
license revocation. 
*2nd Offense Within 5 
Years - Five-year license 
denial. 
NOTE: Only a BAC with a 
conviction date of August 
28, 2009 or after can be 
used toward a five-year 
denial.
*3rd Offense - Ten-year 
license denial. 
*3rd and Subsequent 
Offenses - Ten-year 
license denial. 
Please see 
Page 71
 for 
Reinstatement 
Requirements

69
Missouri’s Abuse and Lose Law
If you are younger than 21 years of age, your driver license may be 
taken away for 90 days for any of the following:
•  	Any intoxication alcohol-related traffic offense;
•  	If you possess or use alcohol or drugs while driving a vehicle;
•  	If you alter, modify, or misrepresent a driver license; or
•  	If you are under 18 years of age, and possess or use alcohol, and are 
charged with a second offense.
If you are 21 years of age or older, you may have your driver license 
taken away for one year if you possess or use drugs while driving. To get 
your license back, you must:
•  	Pay a $45 fee;
•  	Submit a form showing you completed a Substance Awareness Traffic	
	Offender Program (SATOP) or comparable program;
•  	Provide proof of insurance for two years (SR-22 filing); and
•  	Retake the complete driver exam.
Minor in Possession (MIP) and Other Intoxication-Related Offenses
If you are older than 15 years of age and under 21 years of age, a state 
court may suspend or revoke your driver license for any of the following:
•  	Purchasing or attempting to purchase any intoxicating liquor;
•  	Possessing any intoxicating liquor (consumption constitutes possession);
•  	Being visibly intoxicated as defined in Section 577. 001, RSMo. ; or
•  	Having a Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) level of more than .02%.
The following chart shows the consequences a young person faces for MIP 
and other intoxication-related offenses:
		
Driver License	
	Crime	
Suspension/Revocation	 To Get Your License Back
MIP
Minor in
Possession
1st Offense — 30-day
suspension
2nd Offense — 90-day
suspension
3rd Offense — One-
year revocation
Pay a $45 fee, and attend a
Substance Awareness Traffic 
Offender Program (SATOP) or 
comparable program. If your 
driving privilege is revoked 
for one-year, provide proof of 
insurance for two years (SR-22 
filing), and retake the driver exam.
Proof of Insurance
If you are facing consequences of a DWI or BAC, you will be required to 
file proof of insurance with the Driver License Bureau. The most common 
method of filing proof of insurance is an SR-22 insurance filing. 
Proof of insurance must be kept on file with the Driver License Bureau for 
two years. If you do not keep proof of insurance on file, your driver license 
will be suspended for the rest of the two years, unless you file proof of
insurance and pay a $20 fee.
There is one exception to this rule: Minors with a BAC of .02% or more do 
not have to file proof of insurance on a first-offense.

70
More information about insurance is included in Chapter 13 of this Guide.
Refusal to Submit to a Chemical Test of Your Blood Alcohol 
Content (BAC)
If a police officer stops you and you refuse to take a chemical test to determine 
your BAC, your driver license will be taken away for one year. Your driver 
license may be reinstated if you submit the requirements listed below. 
Reinstatement Requirements for Intoxication-Related Offenses
Your license will be reinstated if you:
•  	 Pay a $45 fee;
•  	 Submit a form showing you completed a Substance Awareness Traffic 
Offender Program (SATOP) or comparable program;
•  	Provide proof of insurance for two years (SR-22 filing); and
•  	Have an ignition interlock device (IID) installed on any vehicle you 	 	
	
operate for at least six months from date of reinstatement if you have 	
	
more than one intoxication-related law enforcement contact.
Ignition Interlock
An ignition interlock device (IID) is a mechanical unit that is connected to 
the vehicle’s ignition, horn, and headlights, and measures the concentration 
of alcohol in a person’s breath. The IID requires vehicle operators to 
provide a breath sample before starting the vehicle and periodically during 
the operation of the vehicle.  
If you have more than one intoxication-related contact showing on your 
driver record, you must have an IID installed on any vehicle you operate 
before your driving privilege can be reinstated. The IID must be maintained 
for a minimum of six months from your reinstatement date without any 
violations in the last three months. You must pay for having the device 
installed and for having it serviced every month. If you fail to maintain the 
IID, your driving privilege will be re-suspended. You will be required to have 
the device serviced/installed, send proof to the Driver License Bureau, and 
pay a $20 reinstatement fee before having your driving privilege reinstated.  
In addition to driver licensing requirements, a court may impose other 
requirements such as: IID use for the first DWI conviction; or use of a 
device for longer than six months.  
If you receive a ticket for failing to have an IID installed as required by law 
and you are convicted in court, your driving privilege will be revoked for one 
year. A second-offense requires your driving privilege to be taken away for 
five years.  
To locate a list of approved ignition interlock devices and installers, visit
https://www. modot. org/ignition-interlock or contact the Missouri 
Department of Transportation at 800-801-3588.

71
71
Physical and Mental Effects of Alcohol and Drugs
Alcohol and other drugs can create physical and mental changes in the body 
that make it difficult to drive. Judgement, vision, reflexes, and alertness can 
all be impaired by alcohol and other drug use. It is dangerous and illegal to 
drive under the influence of alcohol or other drugs. In Missouri, a person can 
be charged with DWI (Driving While Intoxicated) for driving while impaired by 
alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription medication, over-the-counter medication, or 
any combination of these. The use of any drug (the law does not distinguish 
between prescription, over-the-counter, or illegal drugs) which impairs your 
ability to drive safely is illegal. The penalties for DWI in Missouri are exactly 
the same regardless of whether the impairment is from drugs or alcohol. The 
punishment for those convicted of DWI is up to six months in prison and a fine 
of up to $500 and the loss of driving privileges. Drunk and/or drugged driving 
puts the driver, passengers, and others who share the road at risk. Please 
keep yourself and others safe by not driving while impaired.
Alcohol
Alcohol can significantly impair the brain and body so that it is unsafe to drive. 
Alcohol slows reflexes and decreases reaction time, making it unsafe for
drivers to quickly react to a variety of situations. Alcohol can affect vision, 
including slowing down eye muscle function, altering visual perception, and 
impairing night vision. Alcohol can cause drowsiness, decreased 
concentration, and decreased attention. Alcohol can also impair coordination, 
reduce comprehension, and limit the ability to make rational decisions. It is 
illegal to drive with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08% or more (0.04% for 
commercial vehicle drivers and 0.02% if under 21). It is illegal to possess or 
purchase alcohol if you are under the age of 21. Remember: Even one drink is 
likely to affect your ability to drive safely and in many cases, two drinks could 
place you over the legal blood alcohol limit.
Prescription and Over-the-Counter Medications
Remember that all medications, both prescription and over-the-counter, are 
potentially dangerous and can impair driving, even when taken as directed. 
Check with your physician or pharmacist and read the warning label if you 
are not sure whether taking the medication will affect your driving. It is 
your responsibility to know the effects of the medications you take. Over-
the-counter medicines that you take for colds and allergies can make you 
drowsy and affect your driving ability. Pep pills, “uppers,” and diet pills can 
make a driver more alert for a short time. Later, however, they can cause 
a person to be nervous, dizzy, and not able to concentrate. They can also 
affect vision. Any drug that “may cause drowsiness or dizziness” is one you 
should not take before driving. Do not mix medications, unless directed by 
your physician. Do not take medications prescribed for someone else. This 
is dangerous and illegal. Use medications only as prescribed. Do not mix 
alcohol with your medications (prescribed or over the counter). Medicines 
taken together or used with alcohol can be dangerous. Many drugs have 
unexpected side effects when taken with alcohol. Make sure you read the 
label and know the effects of any drug you use.

72
Marijuana
Marijuana is the second most cited drug in car crashes, after alcohol. Even 
though medical marijuana was approved by Missouri voters effective in 2020, it 
is never legal or safe to drive while under the influence of marijuana. 
Marijuana can impair cognitive function, impair judgment of time and distance, 
and decrease coordination. Research studies have shown negative effects 
of marijuana on drivers, including an increase in lane weaving, poor reaction 
time, and altered attention to the road. Use of alcohol with marijuana made 
drivers even more impaired, causing even more lane weaving.
Substance Use Disorder
Substance use disorders occur when the recurrent use of alcohol and/or 
drugs causes clinically and functionally significant impairment, such as health 
problems, disability, and failure to meet major responsibilities at work, school, 
or home. Substance use disorders put people at greater risk for injuring them­
selves or others in a motor-vehicle crash. If you feel you have a substance use 
disorder, there is help available. Currently, many Americans are being treated 
and have been treated successfully for substance use disorders. Locate a 
treatment provider near you by calling the SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration) National Helpline at 1-800-662-HELP 
(4357). This is a free and confidential helpline available 24 hours/day, 365 
days per year.
One of the greatest predictors of someone developing an addiction is early 
use. If someone experiments with harmful substances or illicitly obtained 
medications before their brain is fully developed, they are more vulnerable to 
the negative effects. A young person’s under-developed brain can become 
damaged quicker and more severely than an adult brain using the same 
substances. Therefore, a young person is more susceptible to developing a
substance use disorder.

73
73
Driving is a privilege, not a right. You can lose your driving privilege if you
disobey the traffic laws. When you are convicted of a traffic violation, while 
your vehicle was in motion, the Department receives notice and adds points
to your driving record. This isn’t like a football or basketball game - you 
don’t want these points. You can lose your driving privilege when you 
accumulate too many points.
The number of points you receive depends on the conviction. For example, 
you may receive two or three points if you are convicted of speeding 
(depending on if the court was municipal, county, or state level). By 
contrast, you may receive 12 points and the revocation of your driving 
privilege if you are convicted of leaving the scene of a traffic crash.
The following are examples of some state law violations and the point 
values associated with them:
	
Violation	
Point Value
	
Speeding .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	  3 points
	
Careless & Imprudent Driving .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 	  4 points
	
Knowingly Allowing an Unlicensed Driver 
	
	
to Operate a Vehicle .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 	  4 points
	
A Felony Involving a Motor Vehicle  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 	12 points
	
Obtaining a Driver License by 
	
	
Misrepresentation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 	12 points
	
Operating a Vehicle with a Suspended 
	
	
or Revoked Driver License  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 	12 points
Racking Up Points: The Consequences
If you accumulate a total of 4 points in 12 months, the Department will send 
you a point accumulation advisory. 
If you accumulate a total of 8 or more points in 18 months, your driving 
privilege will be suspended. Below are the consequences for accumulating 
8 points in 18 months:
•  	1st suspension — 30 days 
•  	2nd suspension — 60 days 
•  	3rd (or subsequent) suspension — 90 days
Your driving privilege will be revoked for one year if you accumulate:
•  	12 or more points in 12 months
•  	18 or more points in 24 months
•  	24 or more points in 36 months 
Depending on whether your suspension or revocation was related to 
alcohol, there are different reinstatement requirements. 
For a non-alcohol related point suspension or revocation, you will need to:
•  	 Submit proof of insurance (SR-22); and
•  	 Pay a $20 reinstatement fee.
For an intoxication-related point suspension or revocation, you will need to 
submit the reinstatement requirements on Page 71. 
Chapter 11 - The Point System 

74
74
Details about submitting proof of insurance (SR-22) can be found in 
Chapter 13, Mandatory Insurance.
How Points Come Off Your Driving Record
When your driving privilege is reinstated, the Department reduces your 
total points to four. Every year you drive without getting new points on your 
record, the points will be reduced. 
•	 After one year - Remaining points will be reduced by one-third
•	 After two years - Remaining points will be reduced by one-half
•	 After three years - Points reduced to zero
Although your points may be reduced to zero, certain convictions must 
remain listed permanently on your driving record.
Other Consequences
Driving While Your License is Suspended or Revoked
If you drive while your license is suspended, your driving privilege may be 
revoked for one year after you are convicted. If you continue to drive while 
your license is revoked, you may be convicted of a felony and have your 
license revoked again for one year.
Failure to Appear in Court for Traffic Violations (FACT)
When you fail to appear in court for a traffic violation, the court will notify 
you of your failure to comply. The court will give you 30 days to pay the 
fines before the court notifies the Driver License Bureau (DLB).  If you do 
not comply within 30 days, the court will notify the DLB of your failure to 
comply, and your driving privilege will be suspended immediately.
If this happens to you, your driving privilege will be suspended until the 
Bureau receives:
•	 Proof that the ticket is paid; and
•	 A $20 reinstatement fee.
If your license is suspended for FACT, you may get your driving privilege 
reinstated in one of two ways.
•	 Mail the reinstatement requirements to the Driver License Bureau, P.O.
	
Box 3950, Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-3950.
•	 Bring the reinstatement requirements to the Driver License Bureau 
Central Office in the Harry S Truman State Office Building at 301 West 
High Street, Jefferson City, Missouri, in Room 470. Office hours are 7:30 
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays).

75
Chapter 12 - Vehicle Titling and Registration
Titling Your Vehicle
Whether you are a Missouri resident buying a new vehicle, or a new resident 
who recently moved to Missouri, you have 30 days to visit your local license 
office and take care of your legal responsibilities to title your vehicle.
A title is proof that you own your vehicle. When you buy a vehicle, you 
must apply for a title within 30 days. If you do not apply within 30 days, you 
will have to pay a penalty fee.
You may apply for a title at any license office. The title will cost $8.50, and 
you will be required to pay a $9.00 processing fee. You will have to pay all 
state and local sales taxes due. For information on the amount of sales tax 
you will have to pay, contact any license office, call (573) 526-3669, or visit 
our website at http://dor. mo. gov/ and enter “sales tax calculator” into the 
search box.
When you apply for a title, you will receive a receipt. You will receive your 
title in the mail from the Department.
A title is a very important personal document. Do NOT keep your title in 
your vehicle. 
What You Need To Get A Title
The requirements are different for new and used vehicles and for vehicles 
bought in Missouri and outside Missouri. Following is a description of the 
requirements for these situations.
Vehicles Bought In Missouri
•  	New Vehicle Bought in Missouri — The dealer will give you a title
	application and an assigned Manufacturer’s Statement of Origin (MSO). 	
	The MSO indicates the vehicle is new and has never been registered. 	
	You (the purchaser) and the dealer must complete the odometer 
	disclosure portion on the back of the MSO.
•  	 Used Vehicle Bought in Missouri — You must receive a properly
	 assigned title (see below for an explanation) from the seller that proves 	
	 you have bought the vehicle. If you bought the used vehicle from a
	 dealer, you should also receive a completed title application. A proper 
	 odometer disclosure on the back of the title is required on vehicles 
	 that are model year 2011 and newer until the vehicle reaches the age of 
	 twenty years old. If the title assigned to you is an out-of-state title, you 
	 must get an identification number and odometer (ID/OD) verification 
	 form completed by a licensed inspection station.
Vehicles Bought Out-Of-State
•  	 New Vehicle Bought Out-of-State — You must receive the dealer’s
	 invoice or a bill of sale and assigned MSO from the out-of-state dealer. 	
	 You (the purchaser) and the dealer must complete the odometer 	
	
	 disclosure portion on the back of the MSO.

76
•  	Used Vehicle Bought Out-of-State — You must receive either a properly
assigned title (see below for an explanation) from the seller or a reassigned 
title from the dealer. If the state does not require a title, you must get a 
bill of sale and the vehicle’s last certificate of registration in that state. A 
proper odometer disclosure is required on vehicles model year 2011 
and newer until the vehicle reaches the age of twenty years old. If the 
title assigned to you is an out-of-state title, you must get an identification 
number and odometer (ID/OD) verification form completed by a licensed 
inspection station.
Properly Assigned Titles
A properly assigned title has the following information completed in the 
assignment area:
•	 Buyer’s name and address;
•	 Odometer reading, if applicable;
•	 Sale price of vehicle;
•	 Date of the sale;
•	 Name of any lienholder, if applicable;
•	 Signature and printed name of all sellers; and 
•	 Buyer’s printed name and signature, if applicable.
Salvage Vehicles 
For information on titling a vehicle bought for salvage, dismantling, or 
rebuilding, call (573) 526-3669, or write to:
	
Missouri Department of Revenue
	
Motor Vehicle Bureau
	
301 West High Street, Room 370
	
P.O. Box 100
	
Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-0100
Odometer Readings
When you buy or sell a vehicle, the seller must write the mileage reading 
on the title assignment if the model year is 2011 or newer and the vehicle is 
less than 20 years old. If the vehicle is new, the odometer reading must be 
on the MSO. Both the buyer and the
seller must print and sign their names verifying the mileage. In some 
instances, a separate odometer statement may be required.
Registering Your Vehicle
If you are a Missouri resident, you are required to register your vehicle in 
Missouri. If you are a new Missouri resident, you must register your vehicle 
within 30 days of becoming a Missouri resident. 
If you are a new Missouri resident, you must surrender your out-of-state title 
and apply for a Missouri title. If a financial institution has possession of 
your title, and is unable to release the out-of-state title to you, you must 
provide a statement from the financial institution indicating the title will not
be surrendered to the vehicle owner and one of the following three options, 
a copy of the front and back of the out-of-state title indicating the applicant(s) 
name as the owner and the financial institution as the lienholder; copy of the 
out-of-state title receipt indicating the applicant(s) name as the owner and 
the lienholder’s name as the lienholder when the out-of-state title is from 

77
an electronic titling state; or a statement from the financial institution, on 
letterhead, declaring the out-of-state title is held by an electronic titling state.
When you register your vehicle in Missouri, you will receive Missouri 
license plates and a year tab located on the plate. 
You may register your vehicle at any license office. If you are registering 
a passenger vehicle, your registration fee will be based on your vehicle’s 
taxable horsepower. If you are registering a commercial vehicle, your 
registration fee will be based on its zone and gross weight. An additional 
processing fee will apply.
You may be eligible to obtain a two-year registration for your vehicle. 
During an even-numbered year (like 2018) you may register for two years if 
your vehicle has an even-numbered model year. Likewise, during an odd-
numbered year (like 2019) you may register for two years if your vehicle 
has an odd-numbered model year. Otherwise, only a one-year registration 
is available.
What You Need to Register Your Vehicle
About two months before your vehicle registration expires, you should 
receive a renewal notice in the mail. If you do not receive the notice, you 
are still required by law to renew your license plates before they expire.
To ensure you receive a renewal notice, remember to update your address 
if you move. You can e-mail mvbmail@dor. mo. gov and include your full 
name, old and new address, your driver license number or last four digits of 
your social security number, and your vehicle’s license plate number(s).
The renewal notice will list your requirements to renew your vehicle 
registration. Make sure to read the list and bring the required documents 
to the license office with you. The requirements are listed below but all of 
them may not apply to you. 
•	 Renewal notice from the Department, a registration receipt from the 		
	
previous year, or a copy of your title.
•	 Paid personal property tax receipt or a statement of non-assessment 	
	
from the county in which you reside (or city of St. Louis) for the period 	
	
of your previous registration. (If you had a one-year registration, show 	
	
the previous year’s receipt. If you had a two-year registration, show 		
	
receipts from the previous two years.)
•  	 Current insurance identification card or other proof of financial
   	responsibility (refer to Chapter 13 for detailed information).
•  	 Current certificate of safety and/or emissions inspection done within the 	
	 last 60 days, if applicable (refer to Chapter 14 for more information).
•  	 The correct registration and processing fee.
Tip! You may also be able to renew your plates online at http://dor. mo. gov/
motorv/plates/. If you are eligible for this convenient option, a Personal 
Identification Number (PIN) will be printed on your renewal notice.

78
Other Information
Selling a Vehicle
State law requires you to report the sale of your motor vehicle or all-terrain 
vehicle by completing a Notice of Sale (Form 5049) and submitting it to any 
license office or to the address on the form within 30 days.
Stolen License Plates and Tabs
State law allows you to replace stolen license plates and tabs up to two 
times per year at NO COST (a $9.00 processing fee is applicable) if you 
sign a notarized affidavit certifying the plates or tabs were stolen.
Lost or Destroyed Title, Plates, or Tabs
If your license plate(s), tab(s), or title is lost or destroyed, you must apply 
for a replacement. The charge for a replacement title is $8.50; the charge 
for replacement plates is $8.50 per plate; and the charge for a set of 
replacement tabs is $8.50. An additional processing fee of $9.00 will also 
apply.  
Personalized and Specialty License Plates
You have the option to obtain personalized or specialty license plates for 
your vehicle. In addition to the normal registration fee, there may be an 
additional personalized plate fee. Information regarding personalized and 
specialty license plates may be found online at:
http://dor. mo. gov/motorv/plates/specialty. php.

79
The Basics
State law requires all motor vehicle operators and owners to have a form of 
liability insurance. Liability insurance covers the policyholder’s legal liability 
resulting from injuries to other persons or damage to their property. This is 
called Financial Responsibility.
Motor vehicle owners are required to show proof of insurance when 
registering a vehicle or renewing their license plates. There are several 
ways you can provide proof of insurance. They are listed below:
•  		A copy of your original, current insurance identification card given to you 	
		by your insurance company;
•  		A copy of your motor vehicle liability insurance policy or insurance 	 	
		binder; (a temporary policy)
•  		A paid insurance receipt showing the policy information;
•  		A certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department;
•  		An ID card issued by the Department when a surety bond, or securities 	
		are filed with the Department; or
•  		Hand held electronic device.
Most drivers obtain liability insurance through an insurance company or 
agent, but there are other forms of liability insurance:
•	 Self-insurance: To be self-insured, you must have more than 25 vehicles 	
	
and be able to show you can and will pay for damage caused by your 	
	
vehicles. A certificate of self-insurance will be issued to you by the 	 	
	
Department.
•  	 Surety bond, Certificate of Deposit, Other Negotiable Securities: To 
insure through a bond, deposit, or security, you must file the bond, 
certificate, or security in the amount of $75,000 (or $150,000 if a real 
estate bond) with the Department. The Department will issue you a 
certificate of self-insurance as proof of insurance.
•  	 Cash: A deposit of $75,000 cash may be deposited with the State
	 Treasurer. 
	
A certificate of self-insurance will be issued to you by the Department.
Minimum Coverage Requirements
Liability insurance covers your legal liability when injuries or property 
damage happen to others as a result of your actions. The minimum level of 
coverage required by state law is shown below:
•	
$25,000 per person for bodily injury;
•	
$50,000 per crash for bodily injury; and
•	
$25,000 per crash for property damage. 
The law also requires you to have uninsured motorist coverage of $25,000 
for bodily injury per person and $50,000 for bodily injury per crash.
Chapter 13 - Mandatory Insurance

80
Maintaining Your Insurance
When you register a vehicle with the Department, you must sign a form 
stating that you have insurance and will keep insurance on your vehicle. 
You must keep proof of insurance in your vehicle. If a law enforcement 
officer asks you for proof and you cannot show it, you will receive a ticket.
At any time, the Department may require you to show proof of insurance. 
If you are in a crash and did not show proof of insurance at the time, the 
Department will require you to prove you have insurance.
Failure to Keep Insurance
Insurance is important. There are a number of consequences if you fail to 
keep your insurance — not only can it cost you a lot of money if you are in 
a crash, but you may lose your driver license and license plates.
If the Department learns you have not kept your insurance, you will receive
a notice of suspension in the mail. Your driver license and license plates 
may be taken away or suspended for not having insurance. In order to get 
your license and license plates back, there are certain requirements you
must meet.
The most common way to file proof of insurance is through an SR-22 
insurance filing. Contact your insurance company or agent to file the SR-22 
form. If you fail to keep insurance for three years, your driver license and/or 
vehicle license plates will be suspended again.
Failure to Pay for Damages Caused in a Traffic Accident
If you are at fault in an accident and do not pay for the damages you 
caused, your driver license and/or vehicle license plates will be suspended 
for one year. You may be reinstated during that one-year period if you do 
the following:
•	 Pay a $20 fee; and
•	 Send proof to the Department of Revenue Driver License Bureau that 	
	
you have settled the damages.
	Number of
	Suspensions	
What Happens to You
	one suspension	
Your driver license and/or license plates will be
suspended until you:
–	 Pay a $20 fee.
–	 File proof of insurance. You are required to do this
	 for three years.
	two suspensions	
Your driver license and/or license plates will be
	(within two years	
suspended for 90 days. You must also:
	of each other)	
–	 Pay a $200 fee.
		
–	 File proof of insurance for three years.
	three (or more)	
Your driver license and/or license plates will be
suspensions	
suspended for one year. You must also:
–	 Pay a $400 fee.
–	 File proof of insurance for three years.

81
Traffic Crashes
A traffic crash is when you injure yourself, injure someone else, or cause 
damage to property while driving your vehicle. Driving responsibly and 
defensively can reduce your chances of being in a crash, but nothing can 
totally prevent it. Even if you have a crash with a parked vehicle, do not 
leave. Leaving the scene of a traffic crash is a crime. If you are in a crash, 
you should:
•	 STOP! Move your vehicle off the road if possible, especially if it may 	
	
cause other crashes.
•	 Help anyone who is hurt. Try to make the injured person comfortable, 	
	
but do not move him or her. Call an ambulance.
•	 Call the police.
•	 Use flares, reflectors, or flashlights to warn other traffic if the crash has 	
	
happened at night or in bad weather.
•	 Exchange the following information with everyone involved:	
	
○
Name;
	
○
Address;
	
○
Driver license number, vehicle identification number (VIN) and license 
plate number; and
	
○
Name of your insurance company and policy number.
•  	 Stay until a law enforcement officer says you may leave the crash scene.
•  	 Contact your insurance company as soon as possible, even if the crash 	
	 wasn’t your fault.
“Steer It and Clear It”
If you’re involved in a minor traffic crash, one of the first thoughts you might 
have is whether or not you should move your vehicle. The answer is yes.
A state law that took effect ten years ago requires vehicles involved in 
minor, non-injury crashes to move off the road. The Missouri Department 
of Transportation is using the ten-year anniversary to remind motorists to 
“steer it and clear it” to ensure minor traffic crashes don’t turn into major 
pileups. The agency is also putting up signs in the St. Louis and Kansas 
City areas with the “steer it and clear it” message.
“If you’re involved in a minor traffic crash and there aren’t any injuries, you 
need to move your vehicle onto the shoulder or other nearby location off of 
the roadway. Every minute a vehicle stops on the freeway and blocks one 
lane of traffic, it backs up approaching traffic for four minutes.”
The law, known as the “Move It” law also helps reduce the chance of 
motorists being involved in secondary crashes, which cause 18 percent of 
fatalities in Missouri.
Filing an Accident Report
Under certain circumstances, you are required to file an accident report with 
the Department. State law requires the accident report to be filed within 
30 days. Even if the accident happened in a parking lot, or a settlement is 
made, you must report an accident to the Driver License Bureau if:
• 	 The accident happened in Missouri;
• 	 The accident happened less than one year ago;

82
• 	 Someone involved in the accident did not have liability insurance 	
	
	
coverage; AND
• 	 There is damage to or more person’s property in excess of $500, 	
	
	
or there was personal injury or death.
In other circumstances, you may not be required to report the accident, 
but you may want to report it anyway. If the accident did not cause more 
than $500 in property damage, personal injury, or death, you may still 
file an accident report if there was an uninsured motorist involved. The 
Department will only be able to take action against the uninsured motorist 
for not maintaining insurance.
You may obtain a Motor Vehicle Accident Report (Form 1140) from the 
Department’s website, your insurance company or agent, or from any 
license office.
After you fill out the accident report, you may mail or fax it to the Department:
	
Missouri Driver License Bureau
	
301 West High Street — Room 470
	
P.O. Box 200
	
Jefferson City, Missouri 65105-0200
	
Fax: (573) 526-7365
Traffic Crash - Designated Construction, Work, or Emergency Zone
If you are involved in a motor vehicle crash and struck a highway worker or 
emergency responder within a designated construction, work, or emergency 
zone your driving privilege may be revoked according to Sections 
304. 585. 6 and 304. 894. 6 RSMo.

83
Safety Inspections
Safety inspections are required to register or renew the registration on many 
motor vehicles. There are some exceptions, which are discussed in the next 
section. 
Chapter 10 discussed that you need to be in shape to drive. Just the same, 
your vehicle needs to be in shape to be driven.
Your vehicle safety inspection is good for two registration years unless you 
sell the vehicle. “Even” model year vehicles (like 2018) must be inspected 
when their registration expires during “even” calendar years. “Odd” model 
year vehicles (like 2017) must be inspected when their registration expires 
during “odd” calendar years. Each official inspection station may charge an 
inspection fee not to exceed $12 (or up to $10 for a motorcycle inspection).
If your vehicle passes the safety inspection, the inspection station will give 
you a certificate of inspection to show as proof. The certificate is good for 
60 days. If you purchased a vehicle from a Missouri dealer, the certificate 
provided by the Missouri dealer is good for 90 days if the inspection was 
completed within 60 days prior to the purchase date. 
Your vehicle registration renewal notice will assist you in determining 
whether an inspection is required for your next renewal.
Exceptions to the Requirement
The following types of vehicles are exempt from the safety inspection 
requirement:
•  	 Motor vehicles for the first ten years following the model year of manufacture 	
	
and having less than 150,000 miles on the odometer are exempt from the 	
	
safety inspection requirement. This includes vehicles with an out-of-state title.	
	
Example: A 2017 model year vehicle where the mileage continues to be less 	
	
than 150,000 miles, the vehicle would be exempt from the safety inspection 	
	
through and including calendar year 2027.
•  	 All trailers.
•  	 Motor vehicles engaged in intrastate commerce and registered with the 	
	 Missouri Department of Transportation.
•  	 Motor vehicles that display historic license plates.
•  	 Motor vehicles sold for junk, salvage, or rebuilding.
•  	 Motor vehicles sold from dealer to dealer.
•  	 Low speed vehicles as defined in Section 304. 029, RSMo.
•	 Motor vehicles registered for 26,000 pounds or above, and registered 	
	
for a period of less than 12 months. Note: Renewal notice will list a
	
safety inspection requirement; however, if the office issues or renews 	
	
the registration on or after April 1st, an inspection is not required. 
If your vehicle does not fit into the exceptions listed above, it will be required 
to pass a safety inspection. Any licensed inspection station may inspect 
your vehicle for safety. Authorized stations will display the sign shown on 
Page 54. Read your motor vehicle renewal notice for guidance regarding 
your vehicle’s safety inspection requirement.
Chapter 14 - Safety and Emissions Inspections & Required Equipment

84
Equipment Needed
Brakes — Brakes must be in good working order.
Headlights — Your vehicle must have at least two functioning white 
headlights.
Taillights — Your vehicle must have at least two functioning red taillights 
and reflectors that other drivers can see from 500 feet.
Signaling Devices — Your vehicle must have functioning turn signals and 
brake lights as originally installed by the manufacturer.
Steering Mechanism — Your vehicle’s steering mechanism must not have 
too much play or binding.
Tires and Wheels — You must not have bald or mismatched tires on your 
vehicle.
Safety Glass — If your vehicle was made after January 1, 1936, it must 
have safety glass in all windows.
Windshield — The viewing area of your windshield may not be badly broken.
Vision Reducing Material — Your vehicle must not have anything on the 
windshield that will reduce your visibility, except labels and stickers required 
by law or ordinance, and informational signs on the upper portion of the 
windshield normally tinted by manufacturers.
Windshield Wipers — Your vehicle’s windshield wipers must work. 
Seat Belts — If your passenger car was made after June 30, 1964, it must 
have two sets of seat belts in the front seat.
Horn — Your vehicle must have a functioning horn that other drivers and 
pedestrians can hear. 
Exhaust System — Your vehicle must have an attached exhaust pipe, 
muffler, and tailpipe.
Mirrors — If your vehicle was made after 1967, it must have an inside and 
an outside rearview mirror.
Air Pollution Control Devices — If your vehicle was made after 1967 and 
does not have a diesel motor, it must have air pollution control devices. 
These pollution control devices must be as originally installed by the 
manufacturer.
Fuel System — The fuel system, including all lines, hoses, connections, 
and tank(s), must be firmly attached and must not leak.
Mud Flaps — Trucks without rear fenders, registered for over 24,000 
pounds, must have mud flaps.
Bumpers — Bumpers on passenger vehicles may not exceed 22 inches 
above the ground when measured at the highest point. Commercial vehicle 
bumper heights are determined by gross vehicle weight rating.
Other Equipment Required by Law
In addition to the equipment needed to pass the safety inspection, Missouri 
law requires the following equipment:

85
License (Registration) Plates — Missouri law requires that license plates be 
securely fastened to a vehicle, and that all parts of the plates are visible and 
clean for view or inspection by any law enforcement entity. If you have frames 
around your license plates, the MSHP reminds you that the frames must not 
cover any part of the plates. 
If you receive two plates, you must place one on the front and one on the 
back of your vehicle.
If you have a trailer or a motorcycle, you will only receive one plate, which 
must be on the back of your vehicle.
If you have a truck licensed in excess of 12,000 pounds, you will only 
receive one plate, which must be placed on the front of the truck. If you 
want a second plate, it must be specifically requested. You must place the 
original plate on the front of your truck and if a second plate is issued, it 
must be placed on the rear of the truck.
License Plate Light — Your vehicle must have a white light shining on the 
rear license plate so the plate can be seen from 50 feet.
Projections — You need special equipment if something in your vehicle 
overhangs the rear by more than five feet. During the day, the end of the 
projection must have a red flag or cloth that is at least 16” square. The end 
of the projection must have a red light from ½ hour after sunset until ½ hour 
before sunrise.
Towlines — When you are towing another vehicle, your towline must keep 
the vehicles within 15 feet of each other. From ½ hour after sunset until ½ 
hour before sunrise, both vehicles must have lights on.
Slow Moving Vehicle Sign — From sunset to ½ hour before sunrise, any 
vehicle moving 25 mph or slower must have a “slow moving vehicle” sign 
(refer to Chapter 3). The sign must be on the rear of the vehicle, near the 
middle, and four feet or more above the road. The sign must be clean and 
reflective.
Studded Snow Tires — Your vehicle may have studded snow tires only 
from November 1 to April 1.
Window Tinting — Tinting or sun-screening material is permitted on the 
side and rear windows (front door windows at no more than 65% light 
blockage).
Emissions Inspections
Motorists residing in St. Louis City and the counties of St. Louis, St. 
Charles, Franklin, and Jefferson are also required to have emissions 
inspections, if applicable. There are some exceptions, which are listed on 
the next page.
For information on emissions inspections not covered in this Guide, please 
call 1-866-623-8378, or visit the Department of Natural Resources website 
at http://dnr. mo. gov/ and look for the Gateway Vehicle Inspection Program 
(GVIP).

86
The emissions inspection is a two-year inspection. Just like the safety 
inspection, “even” model year vehicles with registrations expiring in “even” 
years must be inspected during “even” calendar years. “odd” model year 
vehicles with registrations expiring in “odd” years must be inspected during 
“odd” calendar years.
All vehicles must be emissions inspected at the time of sale regardless of 
the model year (refer to the list of exceptions below). New motor vehicles 
and the first retail sale of titled motor vehicles during the model year of the 
vehicle and the following year, are exempt from the inspection requirement 
provided the odometer reading is less than 6,000 miles at the time of sale.
Exceptions to the Requirement
The following motor vehicles are exempt from the emissions inspection 
requirement:
•  	 New motor vehicles, not previously titled, during the model year of the
	 vehicle and the following year, provided there is no change in ownership.
•  	 1995 and older gasoline-powered vehicles.
•  	 1996 and older diesel-powered vehicles.
•  	 Motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) 	
	 over 8,500 pounds.
•  	 New motor vehicles not previously titled and registered for the four-year.	
	 period following their model year of manufacture, with fewer than 40,000 
	 miles at the first required biennial inspection.
•  	 Motor vehicles that are driven fewer than 12,000 miles between biennial 	
	 safety inspections
•  	 Vehicles powered by fuels other than gasoline, ethanol or diesel.
•  	 Motor vehicles that display “historic plates”, school bus, shuttle bus,
	 motorcycle, motortricycle, or street rod plates.
•  	 Gasoline-powered low speed vehicles in Franklin County only.
•  	 Motor vehicles registered in one of the affected areas (St. Louis City and 
the counties of St. Louis, St. Charles, Franklin, and Jefferson) but based 
and operated outside the area for 24 consecutive months.

87
You will need to know the following information if you are applying for a 
Class E license. As a driver of a commercial vehicle, you must obey all 
Missouri traffic laws including the laws on commercial vehicles.
Note:
•	 All size and weight limits listed below include the load of the vehicle.
•	 All limits that refer to interstates or certain designated highways include
	
roads up to ten miles from the interstate or highway.
•	 The size and weight and exceptions listed in this chapter are for Missouri
	
highways only.
Size Limitations (Without Special Permit)
Height
•	 Maximum height of any vehicle outside of a commercial zone* on
	
designated highways plus ten miles therefrom..................................14’
•	 Maximum height of any vehicle in a commercial zone......................15’
•	 Maximum height on all other highways..............................................13½’
Width
•	 Maximum width of any vehicle.............................................................8½’
*Commercial Zone — Commercial zones exist only in cities with a population 
of 75,000 or more. The commercial zone is one mile beyond the city limits 
plus one mile for every 50,000 residents or portion thereof, except:
•	 The commercial zone for St. Louis City extends 18 miles beyond the city 
limits.
•	 The commercial zone for Kansas City extends 12 miles beyond the 
	
city limits and includes the city of Harrisonville.
•	 The commercial zones for Springfield, St. Joseph, and Columbia 
	
extends only two miles beyond the city limits.
•	 The commercial zone on interstate highways extends only two miles 
	
beyond the city limits.
Length
•	 Maximum length of any single vehicle..................................................45’
•	 Maximum length of any bus or trackless trolley coach not
	
including one foot in front and back for safety bumper.........................45’
•	 Maximum length of truck-tractor and semi-trailer 
	
○
upon interstates and certain designated highways the length of the 
	
	
semi-trailer (no overall maximum length, includes load)..................53’
	
○
upon all other roads.........................................................................60’
•	 Maximum length of truck-tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer combinations 
	
(double bottoms)
	
○
upon interstates and certain designated highways the length of the 
semi-trailer or trailer (no overall maximum length)...........................28’
	
○
upon all other roads.........................................................................65’
•	 Maximum length of truck and trailer(s) and all other combinations of vehicles
	
○upon interstates and certain primary highways...............................	65’
	
○the overall maximum length upon all other roads...........................	55’
Chapter 15 - Commercial Vehicles

88
•	 Maximum length of Automobile Transporters and Boat Transporters
	
○Conventional 5th Wheel	
75’	for combination unit plus
	
○Stingersteered	
75’	3’ front to 4’ rear overhang.
•	 Maximum length of Driveaway Saddle Mount Combinations (Double or
	
Triple on interstate and designated highways)....................................97’
Motor vehicle carriers may carry loads that extend beyond their legal length 
limits. Loads must not extend more than three feet beyond the front or four 
feet beyond the rear of the vehicle.
Exemptions
•	 Farm machinery driven occasionally for short distances;
•	 Vehicles temporarily transporting farm machinery;
•	 Implement dealers delivering or moving farm machinery for repair;
•	 Vehicles temporarily transporting road-making machines or road
	
materials; and
•	 Vehicles towing disabled vehicles for repair on highways.
These exemptions do not include interstate highways.
Weight Limitations (Without Special Permit)
A bridge’s weight limit may differ from the road’s weight limit. If a bridge has 
a different weight limit, the limit will be posted.
Maximum Weight on Any Single Axle	
 Pounds
•	 Maximum weight allowed on interstates.......................................20,000
•	 Maximum weight allowed in a commercial zone...........................22,400
•	 Maximum weight allowed on all other routes................................22,000
Maximum Weight on Any Tandem Axle	
 Pounds
•	 Maximum weight allowed on interstates.......................................34,000
•	 Maximum weight allowed on all other routes................................36,000
Maximum Gross Weight	
 Pounds
The actual gross weight allowed depends on the distance from the first to
last axle. To determine the maximum gross weight allowed in a commercial
zone, multiply the number of axles by 22,400 pounds. The maximum gross 
weight allowed on all highways in Missouri is 80,000 pounds, except where 
bridge structures are posted with lesser weight limits.
•	 Maximum gross weight allowed on interstates, primary and other
	
designated highways.....................................................................80,000
Overdimension and Overweight Permits
You may apply for an overdimension or overweight permit by calling 
1-800-877-8499, or (573) 751-2871 for local calls only, or by contacting:
Missouri Department of Transportation, Motor Carrier Services Unit
P.O. Box 893
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Fax: (573) 751-7408
To receive an oversize or overweight permit:
•   	The load on your vehicle must be non-reducible;
•   	You must have property damage and bodily injury liability insurance; and
•   	You must pay a permit fee.

89
Vehicle Route Map
The Missouri Vehicle Route Map is available from the Missouri Department 
of Transportation. This map shows the routes on which the larger and 
heavier trucks are allowed to travel as specified by state statute. You may 
obtain a map by calling 1-866-831-6277 or by contacting:
Missouri Department of Transportation, Motor Carrier Services
P.O. Box 893
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Fax: (573) 751-7408
contactus@modot. mo. gov
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
Missouri has adopted as state law Parts 390 through 397 of the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. Therefore, drivers and vehicles operating 
solely intrastate must obey those regulations except for the following 
exemptions:
•   	Commercial vehicles with a GVWR or GCWR of 26,000 lbs. or less than 
26,001 GVWR unless transporting hazardous materials or passengers.
•   	Commercial vehicles licensed for gross weight of 60,000 pounds or less 	
	when used only for the transportation of solid waste.
•   	Commercial vehicles licensed for 42,000 pounds or less for farm use and 
indicated by the letter “F” on the license plate as authorized by Section 
301. 030, RSMo, unless transporting hazardous materials except fertilizer.
Transporting Hazardous Material
If you are transporting hazardous material, your vehicle must comply with 
the equipment and operating regulations of the United States Department 
of Transportation.
Emergency Equipment And Signals
When operating wholly within the state, Missouri law does not require 
emergency equipment for:
•   	Vehicles licensed for 42,000 pounds or less with an “F” plate;
•   	Solid waste haulers licensed for 60,000 pounds or less; and
•   	Commercial vehicles licensed for 12,000 pounds or less.
Any other commercial motor vehicle used for intrastate or interstate 
commerce that is licensed for more than 12,000 pounds must carry the 
following emergency equipment:
•   	One fire extinguisher. The extinguisher must be rated at 5 B:C or more 
by Underwriter’s Laboratories Incorporated.
•   	One spare fuse or other overload protective device for each kind and 	
	size used, if the devices are not of a reset type.
•   	One of the following combination of warning devices:
	
○
Three flares (liquid-burning pot torches) and three fuses and two red 	
	
flags. This combination must not be carried by vehicles transporting 	
	
explosive or flammable material or using flammable compressed gas 
	
as a motor fuel.
	
○
Three red electric lanterns and two red flags.
	
○
Three bi-directional emergency red reflective triangles.

90
Information on Commercial Motor Vehicles
The following information must be clearly visible on commercial motor vehicles:
•  	The name of the owner; 
•	 The address the vehicle is operated from and the number issued to a 	
	
motor carrier by the Motor Carrier Services. (USDOT 123456 MO); and
•	 The word “Local” displayed on every local commercial vehicle. For-hire 	
	
carriers must display their USDOT number followed by the letters “MO”.
Your vehicle does not need to show the above information if:
•	 It is licensed for 36,000 pounds or less; and
•	 It is not regularly used for commercial purposes.
Following Distance
If you are driving a bus or truck, you must not follow another bus or truck 
any closer than 300 feet. However, you may follow closer than 300 feet 
when you are in a business or residential district, or when passing. Always 
stay a safe distance behind the vehicle in front of you. For each ten feet 
of length in your vehicle, keep at least one second between you and the 
vehicle in front of you. For example, if you are driving a 40-foot vehicle, 
keep four seconds between you and the vehicle in front of you.
Railroad Crossing
You must stop within 15 to 50 feet before the railroad tracks if you are 
driving a:
•	 Motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
•	 School bus;
•	 Motor vehicle carrying material that is corrosive, flammable, explosive, or 	
	
poisonous; or
•	 Motor vehicle used for the transportation of flammable or corrosive 	 	
	
liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty.
If there is no sign of a train, you may cross the tracks.
Load Security
To avoid any part of a load falling off your vehicle, you must secure it or 
have a protective cover on it.
Off-Tracking
When a vehicle turns, the rear wheels take a shorter path than the front 
wheels. The greater the distance between the front and rear wheels, the 
greater the difference in their paths. To compensate for the off-tracking, 
begin a left-turn as far to the right as possible. Begin a right-turn as far to 
the left as possible.
Weigh Stations
All commercial motor vehicles must stop at weigh stations except those 
licensed for 18,000 pounds or less or otherwise exempted by law, unless 
directed by a peace officer. 
Tailgaters
To avoid a crash with a tailgater, you should:
•	 Slow down. It is better to be tailgated at a low speed than a high speed.
•	 Avoid any sudden turns or stops and signal well in advance.

91
•	 Increase the distance between you and the vehicle in front of you. This
	
will help you to avoid any sudden stops.
•	 Do not flash your taillights or brake lights at the tailgater. The tailgater
	
may not believe your brake lights when you do slow down or stop.
Space Overhead
Make sure you have enough space over your vehicle at all times.
•	 Do not assume that posted heights at bridges or underpasses are correct.
•	 Check all wires, signs, trees, and air conditioning units.
Soft Surfaces
Make sure the surface will hold the weight of your vehicle. Be wary of:
•	 Parking lots;
•	 Unpaved roads or parking areas, especially when wet; and
•	 Construction areas.
Space to Cross or Enter Traffic
Your acceleration rate varies with the weight of your vehicle. And your time 
to cross the road is also affected by the length of your vehicle. In a long or 
heavily weighted vehicle, you will need a larger gap to cross the road than 
you would in a car.

92
Distracted Driving
Driving is a skill that requires your full attention to safely operate your 
vehicle and respond to events happening around you. Driving involves 
constant and complex coordination between your mind and body. Events or 
things that prevent you from operating your car safely are distractions. All 
distractions endanger driver, passenger, and bystander safety. These types 
of distractions include, but are not limited to:
•		
Texting 	
• 	 Grooming
• 	
Using a cell phone or smartphone	
• 	 Reading, including maps; 
• 	
Eating and drinking 	
•	
Watching a video
• 	
Talking to passengers  	
•	
Surfing the Internet.  
• 	
Adjusting a radio, CD player, or 	
• 	 Using a navigation system
	 	
MP3 player
Because text messaging requires visual, manual, and cognitive attention 
from the driver, it is by far the most high risk distraction. It is against the law 
for any person to read, write, or send a text message or electronic message 
while operating a vehicle.
Are you being driven to distraction?
•  	What do children, friends, and pets all have in common? All can be a 
	
dangerous distraction to you while you are driving.
•  	Teach your young children that driving is an important job and that you 	
	
must concentrate when you are behind the wheel. If you need to attend 	
	
to your children, pull over to a safe place. Don’t try to handle children 	
	
while you are driving.
•  	A carload of friends can be very distracting with loud talking, arguing 		
	
over music selections, or horseplay. Arguments and other disturbing
	
conversations should be held in a safe, appropriate place, not while you 	
	
are driving in your vehicle.
•  	A loose pet in a moving vehicle can be very dangerous. Properly secure 	
	
your pet in a pet carrier, portable kennel, or specially designed pet
	
harness when you are driving. Never allow your pet to sit on your lap 	
	
while you are driving your vehicle.
Turning Dials Can Turn Your Head
•  	Making destination entries on an in-vehicle navigation system, radio 	
	
	
surfing for a good song, or adjusting your vehicle’s climate controls are
	
distracting activities that can put you in danger of a vehicle crash or 	
	
	
near-crash. The availability of in-vehicle Internet and e-mail access from 	
	
cell/smart phones, and other portable devices are added distractions that 	
	
increase your risk of a crash if you engage in these activities while driving.
•  	Adjust vehicle’s controls (climate controls, mirrors, radio, seat, etc.)
	
before you begin to drive.
•  	Check your e-mail, voicemail, and any other portable devices you have 	
	
before you begin driving, or when you reach your destination.
•  	Place an auto-reply message on your cell phone stating you are driving 	
	
and will call them back later.
Chapter 16 - Districted Driving and Electronic Communication Devices

93
•  	Take advantage of normal stops to adjust controls.
•  	Ask your passengers to adjust the radio, climate control, navigation system, 	
	
etc., for you.
Looks Can Kill ...
Looking out your window at what you are passing while you are driving can 
be a distraction if you are concentrating on getting a good look at:
•	 A crash scene  	
•	 A billboard advertisement  	
•	 A vehicle pulled over 	
•	 Street names and addresses
	
by law enforcement 	
•	 Construction work
•	 A scenic view	
Always focus on your driving. It’s crucial that you remain alert while on the 
road to arrive at your destination safely.
Electronic Communication Devices 
It is against the law for any driver of a noncommercial or commercial motor 
vehicle, on any highway or property open to the public for vehicular traffic, to 
use an electronic communication device. 
Under the new law, while the vehicle is in motion, drivers are prohibited from:
•	 Physically holding or supporting a cellphone with any part of their body. 
•	 Manually typing, writing, sending, or reading text-based messages.
•	 Recording, posting, sending or broadcasting video, including video calls 	
	
and social media posts. 
•	 Watching a video or movie. 
The new law does allow drivers to:
•	 Place or receive voice calls utilizing voice-operated or hands-free 
	
functions that can be engaged/disengaged with a single touch or swipe
•	 Talk on the phone, hands-free, utilizing features like built-in phone 	
	
	
speaker, in-car Bluetooth, or ear bud/headset
•	 Send or receive text-based communication through voice-to-text features
•	 Utilize cellphone GPS navigation and music or podcast functions
•	 Using a device to access or view a map for navigational purposes; or to 	
	 access or listen to a broadcast or digital audio recording.
•	 Driver using a device to relay information through a transportation 
	 network company’s digital network to a company driver provided the 	 	
	 device is affixed or mounted to the vehicle. 
Prior to January 1, 2025, drivers violating these provisions of use of an 
electronic communication device may be subject to a warning.  After that 
date, a violation of these provisions may be subject to an infraction. 
Commercial drivers violating this section may be subject to disqualification.  
Fines and criminal penalties may also apply as defined by law in Section 
§304.822.6 RSMo.  
93

94
Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68-73
Bicycles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31-33 
Blind Awareness Fund  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Boater Safety Indicator .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12-13
Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68-72
Child Restraints .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55-56
Commercial Driver License (Class A, B, or C) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 10
Commercial Vehicles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88-92
Contact Us .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 96
Crosswalks and Stop Lines .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42-43
Defensive Driving  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56-62
Deny Driver License (Parent/Guardian) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Distracted Driving .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92-93
Driver License (Class F) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Driver License Renewal  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-8, 10-11
Driver License Restrictions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Driving Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18-21
	
Failing The Driving Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Duplicate Driver License (Lost, Stolen,or Destroyed) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 11
Emergencies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40-41
Emergency Vehicles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 27
Emissions Inspections .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86-87
Endorsements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9-10
Examination .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18-21
	
When You Must Take The Exam: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
	
Where To Take the Exam .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Expiration, License .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10-11
	
Fees .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Failure To Appear in Court For Traffic
	
Violations (FACT)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Fees for Permits/Licenses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Financial Responsibility .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78, 80-83
Following Distance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57-58, 91
For-Hire License (Class E) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5, 18
Full Driver License (Under 21)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 16-17
Funeral Processions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Graduated Driver License Law (GDL) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15-17
Hand Signals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Highway Driving  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37-41
Highway Hypnosis .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
How to Lose Your License  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Index

95
Inspection (Vehicle Safety) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84-87
Instruction Permit  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 15
Insurance (Types of) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Intermediate License .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 15-16
“DHH” Notation For Deaf or Hard of
	
Hearing Applicants .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Licenses (Types of) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5
License Checklist  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
License Plates
	
Lost  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
	
Personalized and Specialty .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Littering .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Mandatory Insurance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80-83
Medical Referral  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Military Mail-in Driver License Renewal  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Missouri Residential Address .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-7
Mopeds .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31-33
Motorcycles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Motorcycle Instruction Permit .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4
Motorcycle License (Class M) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Name Changes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Nondriver Identification Card (ND) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Notice of Sale .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Organ, Eye and Tissue Donor Information .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 11-12
Parking  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35-36
Pavement Markings & Meanings  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42-43
Pedestrians .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30-31
Permanent Disability Indicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Permits (Types of) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4
Physical and Mental Effects of Alcohol and Drugs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 72
Point System .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74-75
Proof of Insurance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70-71, 75, 80-81
Required Documentation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-8
Required Documentation Exemption for
    Senior Citizens .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-7
Requirements to Obtain License/Permit .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-6
Road Rage  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33-34
Road Sign Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Roundabout Intersections .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26-27
Rules of the Road .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22-27
Safe Driving Tips .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55-62
Safety Inspection and Equipment Needed .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 84-86
School Bus Information .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23-24
Seat Belts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55-56
95

96
Selective Service Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Selling a Vehicle .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Sharing the Road  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28-34
Special Driving Conditions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63-67
Stopping Distances .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Suspension or Revocation of Your License .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Tabs (Lost, Destroyed, or Stolen)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Tailgating .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57, 91-92
Tire Pressure .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Traffic Crashes 
	
What To Do .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82-83
	
Reporting A Crash .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82-83
Traffic Officers .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Traffic Signals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43-45
Traffic Signs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45-51
	
Colors .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
	
Shapes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
	
Types .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46-54
U-Turns .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Vehicle Emergencies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65-67
Vehicle Registration  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Vehicle Titling .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76-78
Verification of Identity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-8
Verification of Lawful Status  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Verification of Social Security Number .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Veteran Designation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Vision Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18-19
	
Failing The Vision Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Voter Registration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Website .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
What to Do and Expect When Stopped by Law 
	
Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61-62
Written Test .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

97
Contact Information
Driver License Questions	
Phone Number
General Information  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 751-1887
Automated Information 24 / 7 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . (573) 526-2407
Motor Vehicle Questions
General Information  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (573) 526-3669
State Highway Patrol
Troop A, Lee’s Summit .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (816) 622-0800
Troop B, Macon .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (660) 385-2132
Troop C, Weldon Spring .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (636) 300-2800
Troop D, Springfield  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (417) 895-6868
Troop E, Poplar Bluff .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (573) 840-9500
Troop F, Jefferson City .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (573) 751-1000
Troop G, Willow Springs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (417) 469-3121
Troop H, St. Joseph  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (816) 387-2345
Troop I, Rolla .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (573) 368-2345
Highway Patrol Statewide Toll Free Emergency
Assistance Number .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-800-525-5555
or cellular *55
97

98
 
Safety is on Your Shoulders
Since 1931, 31 MSHP Troopers have been killed in the line of duty. Eight 
of those officers were killed after being struck by a vehicle, whose driver 
was either impaired or not paying attention. The number-one contributing 
circumstance to traffic crashes in Missouri is driver inattention. Please slow 
down and move over away from stationary vehicles along the side of the 
road with their emergency equipment activated. IT’S THE LAW. 
 The law (Section 304. 022, RSMo. ) requires 
motorists to yield the right-of-way and immediately 
drive to a position parallel to, and as far as 
possible to the right of, the traveled portion of the 
highway and thereupon stop and remain in such 
position until such emergency vehicle has passed, 
except when otherwise directed by a police or 
traffic officer.
A revision to the law, which became effective August 28, 2017, requires 
motorists upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle displaying 
lighted red or red and blue lights, or vehicles displaying amber or amber 
and white lights: 
(1) Proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way, if possible, with due 
regard to safety and traffic conditions, by making a lane change into 
a lane not adjacent to that of the stationary vehicle, if on a roadway 
having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the 
same direction as the approaching vehicle; or 
(2) Proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the vehicle, 
maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would 
be unsafe or impossible.
Violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor.

99
99

100
In memory of
those who have given their lives
in the line of duty on Missouri roads.
