Parent, if your child is under the age of 18, please 
read pages 1 through 6 and pages 40 through 45.
2025-2027
Class D
Noncommercial
Driver License Manual

Welcome to the roadways of North Dakota! 
This manual is your go-to resource for understanding the driving laws and expectations in our 
state. Whether you’re a new driver or someone with years of experience, this guide will help 
you travel North Dakota with confidence and clarity.
Our highways, city streets, gravel roads and rural routes connect us to work, school, family 
and the places that make North Dakota special. As you journey across our state, I encourage 
you to stay mindful and make thoughtful, safe choices behind the wheel.
We’re glad to have you on the move in North Dakota. Thank you for doing your part to help 
keep yourself and others safe wherever you travel.
Sincerely,
Kelly Armstrong 
Governor 
State of North Dakota 
Introduction:
The privilege of driving a motor vehicle in the state of North Dakota must first be earned. This 
manual will help you earn and keep this privilege.
The manual is designed as a basic reference for all drivers, and should be used to prepare for 
the written driver’s examination. It does not include some of the information needed to qualify 
for driving passenger buses, school buses, motorcycles, and heavy trucks. Such additional in-
formation is contained in separate manuals available at all driver license offices.
This manual will introduce you to North Dakota traffic laws, rules of the road, and other safe 
driving practices. You owe it to yourself to develop all the skills and knowledge needed to become 
a safe driver.
Driver License Division 
North Dakota Department of Transportation 
608 East Boulevard Avenue 
Bismarck, ND 58505-0750
www.dot.nd.gov
DL0126

North Dakota Driver License and Testing Locations
To obtain a North Dakota operator’s license, you must visit one of the Driver License offices, 
or you may take your knowledge test immediately at nd.knowtodrive.com. An appointment is 
required. Please visit our website to book an appointment or obtain appointment information at 
dot.nd.gov.
Please note: You will receive a failed test score if you leave the testing area while your test is 
in progress. 
Lunch Hour Schedule: All sites closed from 12:00-1:00 p.m. except Bismarck, Minot, Grand 
Forks, and Fargo.
Holiday Schedule: Offices are closed on the following holidays:
New Years Day, January 1 - Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, the third Monday in January 
Presidents’ Day, third Monday in February 
Good Friday, the Friday preceding Easter Sunday 
Memorial Day, the last Monday in May - Independence Day, July 4 
Labor Day, the first Monday in September - Veteran’s Day, November 11 
Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November 
Christmas Eve, December 24 (offices close at noon) 
Christmas Day, December 25
If January 1st, July 4th, November 11th, or December 25th fall on a Sunday, the following Mon-
day shall be the holiday. If these holidays fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is the holiday.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
YOUR OPERATOR’S LICENSE. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND ROAD MARKINGS. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
RULES OF THE ROAD. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
DRIVING SKILLS AND EMERGENCY SITUATIONS. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
DRINKING, DRUGS, AND DRIVING. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
PARENT/GUARDIAN DRIVER COACHING TIPS . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
SUPERVISED DRIVING LOG. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

Reminder: Must make an appointment 
at a North Dakota Driver License office 
to obtain your permit upon successful 
completion of the knowledge test. 
Please review pages 1-7 for appointment 
information and required documents.

1
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
Driver License Offices
For current office locations and hours, go to 
www.dot.nd.gov. Click on Driver. 
For road test appointments visit our website 
at www.dot.nd.gov or dial toll-free at 1-855-
633-6835.
For online knowledge testing visit 
nd.knowtodrive.com.
TTY users may call: Relay North Dakota at 
711. For services that can be done online, go 
to www.dot.nd.gov, click on Driver.
General Information
All drivers license offices are ADA accessible.
Language interpretation for general business 
is provided for people with limited English 
proficiency (LEP).
Additionally, the Request For Reasonable Ac-
commodations (SFN 60135) can be accessed 
at the following NDDOT website location: 
http://www.dot.nd.gov/forms/sfn60135.pdf
The noncommercial (Class D) knowledge test 
is offered in English, Arabic, Spanish, Somali, 
Russian, Vietnamese, Turkish, Swahili, Ne-
pali, Serbo-Croatian, French, Pashto, Dari 
and Chinese.  Automated American Sign Lan-
guage and Audio testing is available at the 
Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck, Dickinson, Wil-
liston, Minot, Devils Lake, and Grand Forks 
driver license offices. 
The motorcycle (Class M) knowledge test is 
offered in English and Spanish. Automated 
American Sign Language and Audio testing is 
available at the Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck, 
Dickinson, Williston, Minot, Devils Lake, and 
Grand Forks driver license offices. The com-
mercial (CDL) knowledge tests are offered in 
English only. Audio testing is available at the 
Fargo, Jamestown, Bismarck, Dickinson, Wil-
liston,  Minot, Devils Lake, and Grand Forks 
driver license offices. 
CHECK LIST FOR TESTING 
You will not be allowed to test without proper 
identification.
1.	Knowledge test items:
	
 Proof of legal presence, current name 
and date of birth. See list of acceptable 
forms of identification on page 5. 
	
 Proof of North Dakota resident address. 
See list of acceptable documents on 
page 5.
	
 As authorized by NDCC 39-06-07 and 
NDCC 39-06-03.1, all applications for 
permit, license, or identification card 
must contain the social security num-
ber of the applicant.
	
 All applicants less than 18 years of age 
must have a parent, legal guardian, or 
designated person sign approval and 
sponsorship on the application. Legal 
guardian must present guardianship 
papers.
	
 Arrive no later than one hour prior to 
noon, if testing at an office that closes 
for lunch, and no later than one hour 
prior to closing. You may not be allowed 
to test otherwise.
	
 Children, pets (except medical alert/
service animals), backpacks, purs-
es, paper, pen, pencil, markers, cell 
phones, notebooks and any other elec-
tronic devices are not allowed in the 
knowledge testing area. 
IMPORTANT: You will receive a failed 
test score if you bring any of these 
items into the testing area. You are re-
sponsible for securing these items in a 
safe place prior to testing. You will also 
receive a failed test score if you leave 
the knowledge testing area before your 
test is completed.

2
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
2.	Road Test Items:
	
 Valid North Dakota operator’s permit.
	
 Applicants less than 16 years of age 
are required to present a driver’s edu-
cation Certificate of Training.
	
 See page 4, Road Test Waiver details. 
Applies to ages 15 and older.
	
 Applicants under 16 must be accompa-
nied by a parent or legal guardian.
	
 Applicant must provide current vehicle 
registration for vehicle used during road 
test.
	
 Applicant must provide current proof of 
insurance for vehicle used during road 
test.
	
 All road test vehicles must pass an 
equipment inspection prior to road test.
	
 Arrive early for your appointment to 
ensure everything is in order for your 
scheduled test.
	
 Pets (except medical alert/service ani-
mals), passengers, and electronic de-
vices such as cell phones, ipods, etc., 
will not be allowed in the vehicle during 
the road test.
Self-parking vehicles are not allowed. The ap-
plicant must test in a different vehicle or deac-
tivate the self-parking feature.
VEHICLE INSPECTION
Part of your responsibility as a driver is to 
keep your vehicle in safe running condition. 
You must allow driver examiner personnel to 
inspect your vehicle.
Before you take your road test, your vehicle 
will be inspected. In order to pass inspection, 
your vehicle must be currently registered and 
have the following equipment in proper work-
ing order:
•	 Brakes—for stopping and parking.
•	 Headlights—with high and low beams.
•	 Brake lights and taillights.
•	 Turn signals.
•	 A leak-free exhaust system, including a 
muffler.
•	 	Doors - function from inside and outside of 
vehicle
•	 A horn clearly audible for 200 feet.
•	 Mirrors—one or more so that you can see 
the road 200 feet behind you.
•	 Seat belts.
•	 A windshield and windows that are intact 
and have no cracks that could interfere with 
driver or examiner’s vision and impact the 
ability to safely operate a motor vehicle.
•	 Windshield wipers.
NOTE: The road test will not be administered 
if the above items or any other factors lend 
themselves to an unsafe vehicle or unsafe 
working environment.
YOUR OPERATOR’S LICENSE
Any person other than a nonresident student, 
a tourist, or a nonresident member of the 
Armed Forces who has lived in this state for 
90 consecutive days, shall be deemed a resi-
dent of North Dakota for the purpose of driver 
licensing. You may operate a Class D or M ve-
hicle with an operator’s license from another 
state for a period of 60 days after you become 
a resident of North Dakota. Then you are re-
quired to take the necessary tests to obtain a 
North Dakota operator’s license. Class A, B, 
or C vehicle operators have 30 days in which 
to acquire a North Dakota Commercial Driver 
License. Proof of North Dakota resident ad-
dress is required.
By knowing and understanding the rules of 
the road, and by demonstrating your ability to 
operate your vehicle, you will earn the privi-
lege of driving in North Dakota.
Except for the exemptions listed, all North 
Dakota residents must have a valid North 
Dakota operator’s license or permit in order 

3
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
to drive in North Dakota. For your operator’s 
license or permit to be valid, it must be signed 
by you. You must have this license or permit 
in your possession every time you drive.
EXEMPTIONS
1.	Non-residents at least 16 years of age who 
have in their possession valid licenses 
from their home state or country, includ-
ing members of the Armed Forces while 
stationed in North Dakota. A non-resident 
must be at least 16 years of age to drive in 
North Dakota.
2.	Employees of the United States govern-
ment or North Dakota National Guard while 
operating a government vehicle on official 
business.
3.	North Dakota residents on active duty in 
the Armed Forces outside North Dakota. If 
these people held a valid operator’s license 
when they left the state, it will remain valid 
until 30 days after discharge or separation 
from the service.
PEOPLE WHO CANNOT GET A LICENSE
1.	Those under 16 years of age unless eligi-
ble for a restricted license.
2.	People whose licenses are revoked or sus-
pended in this or any other state.
3.	Applicants who have been determined to 
be addicted to drugs or alcohol, or those 
considered to be a hazard to public safe-
ty on our roadways because of mental or 
physical disability.
4.	Persons who have a history of epilepsy, 
blackouts, seizures, fainting spells, or other 
lapse of consciousness.
Exception to #4: The person in question has 
had no seizures for at least six consecutive 
months, and is willing to submit to the required 
medical examination.
PERMITS
Instruction Permits allow you to legally prac-
tice driving. Any time you operate with an in-
struction permit, a person with a valid license 
for the class of vehicle being driven, who is 
at least 18 years of age and has had at least 
three years of driving experience, must ride in 
the seat beside you. An individual other than 
the supervising driver and the permit holder 
may not be in the front seat unless the ve-
hicle has only a front seat, in which case, the 
supervising driver must be seated next to the 
permit holder.
To receive a permit you must first pass the 
knowledge examination at a Driver License 
office or at nd.knowtodrive.com and the visu-
al screen test. All applicants must be at least 
14 years of age. Applicants under 18 years 
of age must have parent or legal guardian 
approval and sponsorship. The sponsorship 
must be signed by the father, mother, or legal 
guardian (guardianship papers required). If 
the father, mother, or legal guardian is unable 
to appear, they may designate, through a no-
tarized document, an individual temporarily 
authorized to sign; financial liability remains 
with the father, mother, or legal guardian. If 
there is no living parent or legal guardian, an-
other adult swearing responsibility for the mi-
nor may sign the sponsorship. Please note 
if you passed the permit test online you 
must make an appointment to visit a ND 
Driver License office to obtain your permit.
Individuals who are 14 or 15 years old must 
hold the instruction permit for 12 months or 
to the age of 16, whichever comes first, but 
no less than six months, prior to completing 
the road test or waiving the road test for an 
operator’s license.
Individuals who are 16 or 17 must hold the 
instruction permit for six months or to the age 
of 18, whichever comes first, prior to complet-
ing the road test or waiving the road test for 
an operator’s license.
Individuals under 16 must complete a mini-
mum of 50 hours of supervised practice driv-
ing in variable conditions. Your parent/legal 
guardian must then accompany you to the 
test site on the day of your road test and sign 
that you have completed this requirement. 
NOTE: This is in addition to the formal driv-
er’s education requirement.

4
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Road Test Waiver
The Class D road test may be waived by pre-
senting a North Dakota Driving School Cer-
tificate of Course Completion certifying you 
have completed a minimum of 30 hours of 
classroom driver training and a minimum of 
six hours of actual behind the wheel driver 
training that has been approved for waiver 
purposes by the director of the North Dakota 
Department of Transportation.
The Class D road test may also be waived 
by presenting a North Dakota Department of 
Public Instruction Student Completion Certifi-
cate certifying you have completed a minimum 
of 30 hours of classroom driver training and 
a minimum of six hours of actual behind the 
wheel driver training that has been approved 
for waiver purposes by the director of the 
North Dakota Department of Transportation. 
It is a two-point penalty on your driving record 
for driving in violation of the conditions of an 
instruction permit.
Additional penalties and statutory fees are 
listed in the North Dakota Century Code 
(NDCC), Chapter 39-06.1 Disposition of Traf-
fic Offenses.
A student enrolled in the high school driver ed-
ucation program may operate the driver edu-
cation vehicle without an operator’s license or 
permit while under the supervision of a certified 
operator training instructor, if the school district 
sponsoring the training program has appropri-
ate insurance coverage for the student opera-
tor. To be eligible for behind-the-wheel training, 
an applicant must be at least 14 years of age.
Motorcycle: If you are 14 or 15 years old, you 
may receive a license to operate a motorcycle 
by successfully completing an approved motor-
cycle safety course and passing the motorcycle 
knowledge test. You must present a motorcycle 
safety course completion certificate to obtain a 
license.
Motorized Bicycle Permits: To operate a mo-
torized bicycle, you must be at least 14 years of 
age or older and have in your immediate pos-
session a valid operator’s license, motorized bi-
cycle permit, temporary permit, instruction per-
mit, or motorcycle permit.
APPLYING FOR A LICENSE OR PERMIT
Applications for an operator’s license or permit 
are made with the Driver License Division of the 
Department of Transportation.
1.	 PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED.
	
All applicants must present proof of current name, 
date of birth, and legal presence in the United 
States. Acceptable forms of identification are:
•	 U.S. Birth Certificate (state certified; Gov-
ernment issued)        
•	 U.S. Territory Birth Certificate (certified by 
issuing authority)                
•	 Valid, unexpired U.S. passport or valid, un-
expired U.S. passport card
•	 Report of Birth Abroad issued by the U.S. 
Department of State
•	 Certificate of Naturalization
•	 Certificate of Citizenship
•	 Valid, unexpired Permanent Resident Card
•	 Valid, unexpired Employment Authoriza-
tion Card (Temporary Status)
•	 Valid, unexpired Foreign Passport with 
I-94 (Temporary Status)
•	 Valid I-94 Card Stamped Refugee, Parole, 
or Asylee (Temporary Status)
No photocopies. No hospital certificates. All 
documents must be original or certified cop-
ies only. 
If your current name is different than the name 
on your identity document, you will need to 
bring additional proof of your legal name. 
Acceptable documents for proof of name 
change are a certified marriage certificate, 
a certified adoption document, or a certified 
court order authorizing a name change (no 
photocopies, court seal required).
You will not be allowed to test or obtain a 
North Dakota permit, license, or non- driv-
er identification card without proper iden-
tification. 

5
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
Applicants born in North Dakota may obtain a 
copy of their certified birth certificate by con-
tacting Vital Records at the North Dakota De-
partment of Health (visit www.ndhealth.gov/
vital for details).
2.	PROOF OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
As authorized by NDCC 39-06-07 and 39-06-
03.1, all applications for permit, license, or identifi-
cation card must contain the individual’s social se-
curity number. The document must contain name 
and full social security number. Proof is required 
by presenting one of the following documents:
•	 Social Security Card (actual blue and 
white card)
•	 W-2 Form
•	 SSA 1099 Form
•	 Non-SSA 1099 Form
•	 Pay stub 
3.	PROOF OF NORTH DAKOTA RESI-
DENCE ADDRESS
Proof of North Dakota residence address 
(place of domicile) is required by pre-
senting two documents from the list be-
low. All documents presented for satis-
factory proof of resident address must 
be the most currently issued document.
Acceptable documents for proof of  
address are:
•	 	Most current government issued property tax 
statement
•	 	Current mortgage/lease/rental document
•	 Current homeowners/renter’s insurance pol-
icy
•	 	Current utility bill (electricity, gas, water, sew-
er, cable, recycle)
•	 	School/College Transcript issued within 6 
months
•	 	Current financial statement (issued by finan-
cial institution, government entity, govern-
ment regulated entity)
•	 	Current pay stub or statement from employer
•	 	Current vehicle insurance policy/statement
•	 	Non-expired current resident certificate or 
identification card with physical address is-
sued by a North Dakota Tribal Agency
•	 	Current formal resident statement issued by 
property owner/renter
•	 	Current Relief Agency or Shelter Certification 
All documents must contain your name and 
physical residence address. Post Office boxes 
are NOT acceptable for residence address.
EXAMINATIONS
You must make an appointment to visit one 
of the Driver License offices, or you may 
take your knowledge test immediately at 
nd.knowtodrive.com.
Cooperation With the Examiner
•	 The applicant must at all times cooperate 
with the examiners by following their in-
structions.
•	 License applicants must furnish their own 
vehicle for the road test. The vehicle equip-
ment will be inspected. All equipment must 
be in good working order and display current 
registration.
•	 Pets (except medical alert/service animals), 
passengers, and electronic devices  will not 
be allowed in the vehicle during the road 
test.
•	 In order to pass, you must: follow instruc-
tions, keep in the proper lane, give the proper 
signals, parallel park your vehicle, demon-
strate good driving posture, and obey all 
traffic signs and traffic laws. If you fail any 
of the tests, you will not be allowed to retake 
the examination the same day.
•	 All applicants less than 16 years of age must 
be accompanied by one of their parents or 
a legal guardian when they appear before 
the examiner for the road test. The parent 
or legal guardian will be required to sign an 
authorization stating the need for the child 

6
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
to operate a vehicle without being accom-
panied by an adult.
•	 If you are 14 or 15 years old, you may be 
issued a permit to operate your parent’s, 
guardian’s, grandparent’s, sibling’s, aunt’s 
or uncle’s Class D noncommercial vehicle. 
You may operate a vehicle that is not your 
parent’s or guardian’s to take the road test. 
You must present a driver education Cer-
tificate of Training when you report for the 
road test. To obtain the certificate, you must 
complete 30 hours of classroom and six 
hours of behind-the-wheel training through 
the Department of Public Instruction or com-
plete six hours of behind-the-wheel training 
through a commercial driver training school 
approved by the North Dakota Department 
of Transportation. Go to www.dot.nd.gov for 
a list of approved driving schools.
See page 4 Road Test Waiver for Certificate 
of Course Completion and Student Comple-
tion Certificate requirements.
ORGAN, TISSUE, AND EYE DONATION 
Thousands of people are waiting for a lifesav-
ing or life enhancing organ, tissue or cornea 
transplant. Licensed drivers, or those at least 
14 years of age and applying for their driver li-
cense permit in the state of North Dakota, can 
make a personal commitment to organ, tissue 
and eye donation by checking the “Yes” box 
on the application form. You may also register 
online at donor.nd.gov. This donor indication 
serves as your consent. It is important to dis-
cuss your decision with your family members 
and make them aware of your wishes.
Organs and tissues that can be donated in-
clude heart, lungs, liver, kidney, pancreas, 
intestines, skin, heart valves, bone, and ten-
dons and ligaments. Organs are allocated 
to recipients based upon medical urgency, 
length of time waiting, genetic matching, and 
geography.
Anyone can be a donor, regardless of age and 
health conditions. The donation process does 
not prevent an open-casket funeral. Donors 
are treated with great care and dignity and 
there is no charge for donation to the donor’s 
family. If you are under the age of 18, your 
parents will be asked to affirm your decision.
For more information about organ, tissue, and 
eye donation, contact LifeSource at 1-888-
536-6283 or visit www.DonateLifeND.org.
MINORS DRIVER LICENSE
1.	Upon successful completion of the road 
test, a 15 year old will be issued a restricted 
Class D operator’s license. While in pos-
session of a restricted Class D operator’s 
license, the driver is restricted to operating 
his or her parent’s, guardian’s, grandpar-
ent’s, sibling’s, aunt’s or uncle’s vehicles.
2.	At age 15, when in possession of a re-
stricted Class D operator’s license, the in-
dividual is not allowed to operate a vehicle 
without his or her parent, legal guardian, or 
an individual at least 18 years of age be-
tween the later of sunset or 9:00 p.m. and 
5:00 a.m. The only exception to this is driv-
ing directly to or from work, an official school 
activity or a religious activity.
3.	At age 16 the restricted Class D Operator’s 
License transitions to an unrestricted license.
4.	Anyone, regardless of age who is operat-
ing a vehicle with an instruction permit and 
licensed drivers under the age of 18 are 
prohibited from using electronic communi-
cation devices while driving. This includes 
a device to talk, compose, read or send 
electronic messages. The only exception 
is to obtain emergency assistance, to pre-
vent a crime that appears about to be com-
mitted, or in the reasonable belief that an 
individual’s life or safety is in danger. 
5.	The director shall cancel the operator’s 
license of a minor under 18 years of age 
who has committed an alcohol or drug 
related offense while operating a motor 
vehicle if the individual was a minor;  the 
individual was found to have committed 
the offense by the official having jurisdic-
tion or plead guilty to or was found guilty of 
or was adjudicated to have committed the 
offense;  the offense created an imminent 
risk to another individual;  a lesser penalty 

7
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
would be ineffective to prevent future risk 
to another individual;  and the official hav-
ing jurisdiction orders the director to cancel 
the operator’s license.
6.	A minor, under 18, whose permit or license 
has been cancelled in this manner will be 
considered as never having had a permit or 
license before. An Instruction permit will be 
issued after successful completion of the 
knowledge and vision tests. A road test will 
be administered after successful comple-
tion of driver’s education and the required 
holding period of the permit (see page 1). 
In the event of a cancellation, driver’s 
education requirements may be met by 
completing 30 hours of classroom and six 
hours of behind-the-wheel training through 
the Department of Public Instruction or six 
hours of behind-the-wheel training through 
a commercial driver training school ap-
proved by the North Dakota Department 
of Transportation or by completing a North 
Dakota Department of Transportation ap-
proved Internet driver education course 
and 30 hours of driving supervised by a 
parent or legal guardian.
7.	The points total does not automatically go 
back to zero when the cancellation re-
quirements are fulfilled. See page 39 for 
point reduction.
RESTRICTIONS
Depending upon your particular capabilities 
as a driver, your permit or license may be re-
stricted.
Standard Restrictions:
1 Corrective Lenses
2 Outside Mirrors
3 Automatic Transmission
4 Special Hand Controls
5 Daylight Driving Only
6 Proof of Financial Responsibility
9 Other (explanation of restriction will be 
printed on reverse side of permit or license) 
If you permanently lose the use of a hand, 
arm, foot, leg, or eye, you must report it to: 
Driver License Division, North Dakota Depart-
ment of Transportation, 608 East Boulevard 
Avenue, Bismarck, North Dakota 58505-0750 
(NDCC 39-06-14). 
RENEWALS
You may be eligible to renew your license on-
line.  To determine your eligibility please visit 
www.dot.nd.gov.
www.dot.nd.gov.
Your present license is valid for a certain peri-
od of time depending on the date on which you 
apply. The license expires on midnight of your 
birthday or the “duration of stay” date if an im-
migration document is presented for proof of 
identity, not to exceed the usual licensing cy-
cle period. You may renew your license 10 
months prior to expiration without losing 
any time remaining on the old license.
All renewal applicants must submit to a vision 
test at the time of renewal or present a cer-
tificate of vision obtained from a physician or 
optometrist. The certificate must not be more 
than six months old.
For more information, contact any driver’s 
license office or the Driver License Division, 
North Dakota Department of Transportation, 
608 East Boulevard Avenue, Bismarck, North 
Dakota 58505-0750.
DUPLICATE LICENSES/PERMITS
You must apply for a duplicate operator’s license 
or permit if your license or permit is lost, contains 
any wrong information, or is mutilated so that it 
cannot be read. This is done by visiting a driver’s 
license office. You must present proof of identity 
and documentary evidence for a name or date of 
birth change such as a certified or amended birth 
certificate, certified marriage certificate, divorce 
decree, or legal name change through the court.
You may be eligible for an online duplicate li-
cense.  To determine your eligibility please visit 
www.dot.nd.gov.

8
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
CHANGE OF NAME OR ADDRESS
If you change your name or address, you 
must notify the Driver License Division within 
10 days. You must provide documentary evi-
dence of the change. Please visit our web-
site at www.dot.nd.gov for a list of acceptable 
documents.
REGISTERING YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE
North Dakota law requires that a motor ve-
hicle be registered immediately in North Da-
kota, when the owner or operator becomes 
a resident of the state or becomes gainfully 
employed in this state.
Two registration options are available:
1.	Obtain a North Dakota title and purchase 
a vehicle license valid through the end of 
the registration period. We recommend 
this option if your present registration will 
expire during the time you expect to be in 
North Dakota. All vehicles must have liabil-
ity insurance. Vehicle owners shall not per-
mit a vehicle to be driven without a policy of 
liability insurance. As a driver, you should 
be sure that the vehicle you are driving is 
properly insured.
2.	Purchase a temporary registration permit 
if the vehicle license from another state is 
still current and if you plan to be in North 
Dakota only a short time. The permits are 
available for six months or 12 months; a 
$10 service fee is charged in addition to 
the registration fee each time a permit is 
purchased or renewed. The vehicle regis-
tration card must be carried in the vehicle 
at all times.
Contact the NDDOT Motor Vehicle Division at 
(701) 328-2725 for all vehicle questions.
CLASSES OF LICENSES
North Dakota has five classes of operator’s 
licenses. Each class requires its own written 
exam and a demonstration of driving skill for 
that class of license. This manual prepares 
you for the Class D License only.
Class A: Any combination of vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross 
vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more, 
whichever is greater, provided the vehicle be-
ing towed has a GVWR or gross vehicle weight 
of 10,001 pounds or more, whichever is great-
er. (May also operate Class B, C, and D vehicle 
groups, but not a Class M, unless endorsed.)
Class B: Any single vehicle with a GVWR or 
gross vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more, 
whichever is greater. May tow a vehicle not in 
excess of 10,000 pounds. (May also operate 
Class C and D vehicle groups, but not Class M, 
unless endorsed.)
Class C: Any single vehicle with a GVWR 
of 26,000 pounds or less that is designed to 
transport 16 or more passengers, including the 
driver or is transporting hazardous materials 
under 49 CFR Part 172 (placarded material) 
and 42 CFR part 73. May tow a vehicle not in 
excess of 10,000 pounds. (May also operated 
a Class D vehicle, but not a Class M, unless 
endorsed).
Class D: Any single vehicle less than 26,001 
pounds GVWR may tow trailers not over 10,000 
pounds GVWR.
NOTE: Must be 18 years of age or under farm 
exemption if combined weight exceeds 26,000 
pounds. Trucks towing trailers over 10,000 
pounds, provided the combined weight does 
not exceed 26,000 gross combination weight 
rating. Not valid for Class A, B, C, or M, unless 
endorsed.
An emergency vehicle, RV, camper, vehicle 
driven by active duty member for military pur-
poses, or a vehicle towing a travel trailer be-
ing used solely for personal purposes may be 
driven with a Class D license.
The following may also be operated on a Class 
D License (farm exemption):
1.	Age 15 may drive a farm vehicle within 150 
miles of driver’s farm, having a gross weight 
of not more than 50,000 pounds, when 
transporting agricultural products or farm 
supplies.
2.	Any two-axle, tandem axle, or triple axle, or 
truck-tractor farm vehicle controlled and op-

9
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
erated by a farmer transporting agricultural 
products, farm machines, or farm supplies 
to or from a farm within 150 miles of the per-
son’s farm. Farm vehicle may tow a trailer, 
semi-trailer, or farm trailer except double or 
triple trailers, or if under 18 years of age, a 
truck-tractor.
3.	Any farm vehicle operated by a farmer may 
transport hazardous material within 150 
miles of the farm without a hazardous mate-
rial endorsement on the operator’s license.
4.	Covered Farm Vehicles may also be oper-
ated on a Class D License. These are ve-
hicles used for farm or ranch purposes that 
display either farm registration plates or 
are identified by a designation that clear-
ly identifies the vehicle as a farm vehicle 
(in North Dakota, form SFN 60860 avail-
able on our website at www.dot.nd.gov). 
 
A covered farm vehicle with a Gross Ve-
hicle Weight (GVW) or Gross Vehicle 
Weight Rating (GVWR), whichever is 
greater, of 26,001 pounds or less may be 
operated anywhere in the United States. 
 
A covered farm vehicle with a GVW or 
GVWR, whichever is greater, of more than 
26,001 pounds may be operated within the 
state where it is registered, or if travelling 
outside of the state, within 150 air miles of 
the owner or operator’s farm or ranch.
Class M: Any two- or three-wheeled motor-
cycle.
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND ROAD 
MARKINGS
SIGNS
We use three basic kinds of signs on our 
streets and highways: Regulatory signs, 
Warning signs, and Guide signs. Some, but 
not all, of the signs you will see are shown 
here.
REGULATORY SIGNS
Regulatory signs control and regulate traffic. 
They give mandatory instructions to the driver. 
Most are white with black letters or red with 
white letters.
The Stop sign is the only eight-
sided sign. The Stop sign tells 
you that you must come to a 
complete stop before the stop 
line or crosswalk area. If there 
is no stop line or crosswalk, 
stop as near as possible be-
fore the intersection where you 
can safely see traffic approach-
ing from all directions.
The Yield sign means that you 
must yield the right of way. 
The sign tells you to slow 
down and stop if necessary so 
you can yield the right of way.
The Speed Limit sign is an ex-
ample of a regulatory sign 
showing the maximum speed 
permitted under ideal condi-
tions. These signs will normally 
be found on the right-hand side 
of streets and highways.

10
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
The One Way sign tells you that 
traffic on that particular road 
flows in the direction of the ar-
row only.
 
The Wrong Way sign 
tells you that you are go-
ing the wrong way on a 
street, freeway, or ramp.
The Do Not Enter sign pro-
hibits the driver from enter-
ing a restricted road section.
Some regulatory signs prohibit certain ac-
tions. These signs are square with black let-
tering on a white background. A red circle with 
a red slash indicates the action that is forbid-
den. (Above signs are: No U-turn, No right 
turn, No trucks, No left turn.)
Some states use the yellow pennant-shaped 
warning sign in addition to the rectangle “Do 
Not Pass.” The rectangular “Do Not Pass” 
sign is placed on the right side of the road 
while the pennant-shaped sign is found on 
the left-hand side.
This sign prohibits a right turn on a red light at 
selected intersections. Some intersections 
display this sign electronically.
Two-way Left Turn Only signs 
are used when a lane in the 
center of the roadway is to be 
used only by left turning ve-
hicles in either direction. The 
center lane is not intended to 
be used for passing  or over-
taking.
These signs tell you how to interpret traffic 
signals when you want to make a left turn. 
Pay close attention to the message on each 
one to make the turn safely.

11
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
WARNING SIGNS
Warning signs are used to warn you of poten-
tially hazardous conditions ahead so that you 
will proceed with extra caution. These signs 
are yellow with a black legend.
These warning signs indicate curves or turns 
in the road. They give you time to reduce your 
speed before you enter the curve or turn. 
They are often supplemented with an advi-
sory speed sign showing the maximum rec-
ommended speed to negotiate the curve or 
turn.
These signs warn you of a reduction in the 
number of traffic lanes ahead. Be sure to 
move safely into the proper lane.
Merge left.
The roadway will gain an ad-
ditional lane of traffic. New 
traffic will not have to merge.
The median or divided high-
way ends.
The median or divided high-
way begins and the traffic is 
separated.
The road has two-way traffic.
Traffic may be moving into your 
lane from the right side.
These warning signs indicate intersections on 
the road. Be aware of vehicles entering the 
flow of traffic.

12
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
The Railroad Advance 
Warning sign is round with 
black lettering on a yellow 
background. The sign in-
dicates that you are near-
ing a railroad crossing. 
You should slow down so 
that you can safely stop if 
a train is coming.
Slow-moving vehicle signs are shaped 
like a triangle. They are 
orange with a red, reflec-
tive border. This sign is 
mounted on the rear of 
vehicles or equipment be-
ing towed at a speed of 
25 miles per hour or less. 
Slow down and use cau-
tion.
Pedestrian Signs
May be fluorescent yellow-green or standard 
yellow in color.
Watch out for pedestrians crossing the road. 
(Pedestrian crosswalk.)
School Signs
May be fluorescent yellow-green or standard 
yellow in color.
This sign tells you a school or a marked 
school crossing is ahead. (School ahead.)
This sign warns you of a crosswalk for school 
children. (School crosswalk.
Special Warning Signs
or
or
Yield Ahead
Bump in the road 
ahead. Slow down 
to avoid loss of 
control.
Traffic Signal Ahead
Deer Crossing
Watch for bicyclists 
when you see this 
sign.
Slow down because 
this road is slippery 
when wet.

13
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
CHANNELIZING DEVICES
Barricades, vertical panels, drums, cones, 
and tubes are the most commonly used de-
vices to alert drivers of conditions in highway 
and street work areas and to guide drivers 
safely through the work zone.
The diagonal stripes on the barricade or verti-
cal panel guide the driver towards the direc-
tion to which traffic is to pass. Stripes sloping 
downward to the right mean the driver should-
keep to the right. Conversely, stripes sloping 
downward to the left mean keep to the left.
FLASHING ARROW PANELS
Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels 
may be used in work zones both day and 
night to direct drivers into certain traffic lanes 
and to inform them that part of the road or 
street ahead of them is closed. The arrow 
panel may also be used in a caution mode.
Pass to the Left
Pass to the Right
Barricade
Panel
Guide
Guide
Caution
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
DEVICES
Special signs and traffic control devices are 
used in highway work zones. Most signs in 
work areas are diamond shaped. A few signs 
are rectangular. These signs are orange with 
a black legend. You may also see electronic 
signs that display changing messages. Slow 
down through construction and maintenance 
zones! Failure to comply with work zone 
speed limits carries an $80 minimum fee 
when work is in progress and workers are 
present.

14
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
FLAGPERSONS
Flagpersons are often provided in highway 
and street work zones to stop, slow, or guide 
traffic safely through the area. Flagpersons 
wear orange, yellow, strong yellow-green, or 
fluorescent vests, shirts, or jackets and use 
red flags or stop/slow paddles to direct traffic 
through work zones.
WORK ZONE SAFETY TIPS
•	 Pay attention. Work Zones contain many 
hazards such as uneven pavement, narrow 
lanes, heavy equipment, and loose gravel.
•	 Slow down. Most crashes in the summer 
months are related to excessive speeds. 
Remember, workers are just inches away 
from traffic.
•	 Watch for signs. Over 25,000 serious in-
juries occur nationally in work zones each 
year. See Orange signs.
•	 98 percent of Work Zone fatalities are trav-
elers. Motorists and passengers suffer most 
of the traffic casualties in work zones.
•	 Work Zones can appear at any time of day. 
Road crews work both night and day. Watch 
where you are going, especially at night.
GUIDE SIGNS
Guide signs provide information about direc-
tions, distances, available services, points of 
interest, and other geographical, recreational, 
or cultural information.
Guide signs are rectangular in shape, though 
their colors vary according to their message.
Signs which give direction are 
rectangular in shape. The let-
ters are white on a green back-
ground. These signs give infor-
mation about the direction of 
and distance to your destination. 
They give information about 
junctions and routes as well.
Milepost signs are long rect-
angles. The letters are white on 
a green background. The num-
bers on these signs tell you how 
many miles you are from the 
south or west border of the state 
or origin of the route within the 
state.
Service signs are rectangular. The symbols 
are white on a blue background.
This is a special sign. The sym-
bol of access sign indicates that 
facilities such as rest areas are 
free of barriers to people with 
mobility impairments.
Hospital
Telephone
Gas

15
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
A green arrow means you 
may enter the intersection to 
make the movement indicat-
ed by the arrow. If the green 
arrow comes on at a red light, 
you may turn in the direction 
of the arrow. You must yield 
the right of way to all pedes-
trians and vehicles already in 
the intersection. 
Note: You may turn right on a red light af-
ter stopping when the intersection is clear of 
both pedestrians and vehicles, unless there 
is a sign prohibiting a right turn on a red light. 
You may turn left on a red light from a one-
way street onto a one-way street, unless there 
is a sign prohibiting this. If the traffic signals 
are dark, for example in the event of a power 
outage, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and 
yield the right of way to any vehicle in the in-
tersection.
Flashing Indications
Some traffic signals are operated like flashing 
beacons late at night or when traffic volumes 
are light.
Flashing red means the same 
thing as a stop sign—STOP. Pro-
ceed when the intersection is clear 
of pedestrians and vehicles.
Flashing yellow at an intersection 
means proceed with CAUTION.Left 
Recreational area signs are rectangular. The 
symbols are white on a brown background.
SIGNALS
Traffic Signals
Like signs, traffic signals can do their job only 
if everyone follows the rules.
A 
red 
indication 
means 
STOP. As with the stop sign, 
you must stop at a marked 
stop line or before a cross-
walk. Remain stopped until 
the light changes and the in-
tersection is clear of pedes-
trians and vehicles.
A yellow indication means 
WARNING 
or 
CAUTION. 
The light is changing from 
green to red.
Green means GO—but only 
if the intersection is clear.

16
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Turn Indications
Steady Red
Steady Yellow
Flashing Yellow
Steady Green
What Drivers Should Know
STOP. Left-turning drivers must 
stop and wait.
WARNING CAUTION. The left turn 
signal is changing to red.
CAUTION. You may cautiously 
turn left after yielding to oncom-
ing traffic and to pedestrians. On-
coming traffic will typically have a 
green light.
GO. Left-turning drivers have the 
right-of-way.
PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Pavement markings are like traffic signs and 
signals. They direct and control the smooth 
and orderly movement of traffic.
Broken yellow center lines are 
used on two-lane, two-way 
roads. You may cross them 
only to turn left or to pass an-
other vehicle.
One solid line with one broken 
line means no passing when 
you are in the lane with the 
solid line. The solid line may be 
crossed only to turn left.
Two solid yellow lines on a 
two-lane road means no pass-
ing in either direction. Cross-
ing the centerline is permitted 
only as part of a left-turn ma-
neuver.
Undivided Roadway
Multi-lane, two-way  road-
way, crossing the center-
line is permitted only as 
part of a left-turn maneu-
ver.

17
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
Divided Roadways
This is a multi-lane roadway 
with a divider separating the 
traffic flow.
Two-Way Left Turn Lane
The center lane is re-
served only for left-turning 
vehicles in either direc-
tion. Passing or overtak-
ing is not permitted in the 
center lane.
At many busy intersections there are specially 
designated left- and right-turn lanes. If you 
wish to turn left, you must use the special left-
turn lane. If you wish to turn right, you must 
use the special right-turn lane. Some inter-
sections have more than one turn lane.
STOP LINES are wide, white 
lines that show you where to 
stop your vehicle before enter-
ing an intersection. 
When stop lines and cross-
walk lines are used together, 
you must stop your vehicle 
before crossing the stop line. 
UNMARKED CROSSWALK: 
Where there are no lines at 
an intersection, you must 
stop your vehicle before en-
tering the crosswalk (side-
walk area) or, if there is no 
crosswalk, you must stop 
before your vehicle enters 
the intersection.
CROSSWALK LINES are a 
pair of white lines or longitu-
dinal lines that mark where 
pedestrians will walk. Do 
not block the crosswalk with 
your vehicle.
STOP INTERSECTIONS
At an intersection where a stop is required, you must follow these pavement markings—

18
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
not cross the tracks when the red lights are 
flashing. And never drive around the gates 
when they are down.
School buses, vehicles carrying explosives 
or flammable liquids such as gasoline trucks, 
and buses carrying passengers must stop 
at railroad crossings. These vehicles must 
stop within 50 feet and not less than 15 feet 
from the tracks. Watch out for them and do 
not pass them when they are stopped at the 
crossing. Remember, railroad crossings are 
always dangerous. Every crossing must be 
approached with the expectation that a train 
is coming.
TYPES OF CROSSINGS
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing 
does not have any type of traffic control de-
vice. The decision to stop or proceed rests 
entirely in your hands. Passive crossing re-
quire you to recognize the crossing, search 
for any train using the tracks and decide if 
there is sufficient clear space to cross safe-
ly. Passive crossings have a yellow circular 
advance warning signs, pavement markings 
and crossbuck to assist you in recognizing a 
crossing.
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a 
traffic control device installed at the crossing 
to regulate traffic at the crossing. These ac-
tive devices include flashing red lights, with or 
without bells and flashing red lights with bells 
and gates.
Emergency Notification System (ENS). 
The Federal Railroad Administration posts 
emergency phone numbers on railroad cross-
ing posts or the metal control boxes near the 
tracks. Call this number if you see an obstruc-
tion on the railroad tracks or any other prob-
lems at a railroad crossing such as the lights 
or gates are not working properly. Current 
ENS phone numbers are:
Amtrak
1-800-331-0008
BNSF Railway
1-800-832-5452
Canadian Pacific
1-800-716-9132
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
Railroad crossings can be marked with sev-
eral different types of devices: warning signs, 
pavement markings, crossbucks, and signal 
lights. Some railroad crossings are marked 
by all four of these devices, and some cross-
ings are marked by only one or a combination 
of devices.
Watch for these warning devices. And when 
you see them, look, listen, and slow down. 
You may have to stop.
These advance-warning signs 
warn you that a railroad crossing 
is ahead. Begin to slow down and 
be prepared to stop.
This is a crossbuck. It is found 
at railroad crossings. If there is 
more than one track, the sign 
below tells you the number of 
tracks. Make sure all the tracks 
are clear and no trains are ap-
proaching before you cross. For 
safety, never stop or park on 
railroad tracks for any reason. If 
a stop is required, make sure you stop your 
vehicle prior to the railroad crossing. When 
approching multiple tracks please remember 
that an additional train can be approaching 
from the opposite direction that the previous 
train has  cleared.
If your vehicle is trapped or stuck on the 
tracks, evacuate your vehicle and walk in the 
direction of the oncoming train and away from 
the tracks at a 45 dregree angle. If your vehi-
cle is struck by a moving train, the debris will 
spread out from the tracks in the same direc-
tion the train is moving. Then call the “Emer-
cency Notification System (ENS) number to 
report the emergency and then call 911.
Pavement markings may 
be used with the cross-
buck at railroad crossings. 
When a train is crossing, 
stop at least 15 feet be-
fore the crossing. At some 
crossings, gates and red 
flashing lights are used. Do 

19
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
it is recommended to look first to your left, 
then to your right and then left again. Be 
prepared to yield.
•	 At an uncontrolled T-intersection, the ve-
hicle on the terminating street must yield to 
vehicles on the continuing street.
•	 Vehicles turning left 
must yield to oncom-
ing traffic. Watch for 
vehicles passing on 
the right side of a 
vehicle turning left. 
•	 At a four-way stop, 
the vehicle that stops 
first goes first. If one 
vehicle goes out of 
turn, yield to that ve-
hicle so that you do 
not cause a crash. 
•	 Pedestrians in marked or unmarked cross-
walks have the right of way. Drivers must 
yield when pedestrians are in the driver’s 
lane of travel.
•	 Pedestrians carrying white canes or with 
guide dogs are blind or have greatly re-
duced vision. Just as in other pedestrian 
situations, motorists are required to yield 
or stop for anyone who may have begun 
crossing a street. When stopping at an in-
tersection, be sure to stop behind the cross-
walk to allow the visually-impaired traveler 
an unobstructed path. At times the person 
who is blind may choose to wait for optimal 
traffic conditions. The key to safety is based 
on careful observance of the pedestrian and 
common courtesy. Motorists and pedestri-
ans should  not distract a guide dog in any 
way. These friendly, intelligent dogs must 
ENS Sign Sample
HAND SIGNALS
Even though vehicles are equipped with elec-
trical turn and brake lights, you should know 
the basic hand signals as well. All turn signals 
of intention to turn must be given continuous-
ly during the last 100 feet before the turn. Mo-
torists must also be able to recognize hand 
signals given by motorcyclists and bicyclists 
and give them sufficient space to execute 
their signaled maneuvers as they would an-
other vehicle.
RULES OF THE ROAD
RIGHT OF WAY
Right-of-way rules are a means of establish-
ing orderly traffic movement. If everyone fol-
lows these rules, crashes can be reduced. 
Unfortunately, there are many operators who 
ignore the rules. For this reason, you must 
drive defensively. Always be ready to yield to 
those who do not follow the right-of-way rules.
•	 When two vehicles 
approach an un-
signed intersection 
at 
approximately 
the same time, the 
vehicle on the left 
side must yield to 
the vehicle on the 
right. When enter-
ing an intersection, 

20
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
focus on the commands of their owner.
•	 Vehicles entering or crossing a roadway 
from a private drive must yield to all oncom-
ing traffic.
•	 Vehicles emerging from a driveway, alley, 
private road, or building within a business 
or residential district must come to a com-
plete stop immediately prior to crossing a 
sidewalk area and, if no sidewalk, vehicles 
must stop before entering the roadway.
•	 You may not make a U-turn near the crest of 
a hill or any curve where the driver cannot 
see 500 feet or more.
•	 Emergency vehicles always have the right 
of way.
•	 When an emergency or law enforcement 
vehicle is flashing its red, white, or blue 
lights or using its siren, you must immedi-
ately come to a stop along the right-hand 
curb or edge of the road. You must remain 
stopped until the emergency or law enforce-
ment vehicle has passed. Do not stop in the 
middle of the intersection.
•	 	When an emergency or law enforcement 
vehicle is parked at the scene of a crash 
with its emergency lights flashing, you must 
drive to the right-hand side of the roadway 
and stop. Once stopped, you may pass at 
your risk when the roadway is clear. If there 
is a police officer directing traffic at the 
scene, you must obey the officer’s instruc-
tions. If an emergency vehicle, law enforce-
ment vehicle, or North Dakota Department 
of Transportation maintenance vehicle is 
parked on the Interstate system or a multi-
lane highway with its emergency or work 
lights flashing, move over to the opposite 
lane and proceed with due caution.
•	 The yellow-flashing light is used mostly on 
tow trucks and slow moving vehicles. These 
lights warn you to slow down.
•	 When a school bus is stopped and flashing 
its red lights, drivers approaching from both 
directions must stop. This is because chil-
dren are being loaded or unloaded. The 
drivers cannot proceed until 1) the bus be-
gins moving; or 2) the bus driver signals to 
let vehicles pass; or 3) the red lights are 
no longer flashing. When a school bus is 
equipped with yellow caution lights, these 
lights may be used as a warning that the 
school bus is about to stop and that the red 
flashing lights will soon come on. Be espe-
cially alert every time you see a school bus.
SPEED LIMITS
Speed limits are maximum limits to be trav-
eled only when driving conditions are ideal. 
Sometimes conditions may require you to 
drive slower than the posted speed limit al-
lows. Never drive faster than the posted speed 
limit or conditions allow. Authorities may also 
post minimum speed limits if deemed neces-
sary for the safe movement of traffic.
Maximum speed limits in North Dakota have 
been established as follows:
•	 20 miles per hour when approaching any 
railway crossing when your view of the track 
is obstructed, unless otherwise posted.
•	 20 miles per hour when approaching an in-
tersection when your view of the intersec-
tion is in any way obstructed, unless other-
wise posted.
•	 20 miles per hour when you pass by a 
school during school recess or while chil-
dren are going to or leaving school during 
opening or closing hours of school, unless 
otherwise posted.
•	 25 miles per hour in a business or residen-
tial district, unless otherwise posted.
•	 55 miles per hour on gravel, dirt, or loose 
surface roads unless otherwise posted, and 
on paved two-lane county and township 
highways if there is no speed limit posted.
•	 65 miles per hour on rural paved 2-lane 
highways if posted for that speed.
•	 70 miles per hour on paved and divided 
multi-lane highways, unless otherwise posted.
•	 80 miles per hour on rural Interstate high-
ways, unless otherwise posted.

21
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
PASSING
On two-way roads you must drive on the right-
hand side of the roadway; when you pass you 
are driving against the flow of the oncoming 
traffic.
Before you pass another vehicle, ask yourself 
these questions:
•	 Is the pass necessary?
•	 Am I in or approaching a no passing zone? 
(Whenever there is a hill or a curve ahead, 
you must treat it as if there is oncoming traf-
fic just beyond it.)
•	 Can I return to my lane before meeting an 
approaching vehicle?
•	 Can I see the road ahead clearly?
Some Guidelines for Passing
•	 Give yourself enough time to get completely 
beyond the vehicle that you are passing, 
and return to your proper lane at least 200 
feet before meeting an approaching vehicle.
•	 Do not return to your lane until you can see 
the image of the entire front of the vehicle 
you passed within the inside rear-view mirror.
•	 When passing, never leave the main-trav-
eled roadway.
•	 When being passed, do not speed up.
•	 Do not follow too closely.
•	 Obey all regulatory and warning signs.
Never Pass:
•	 While approaching the top of a hill or a 
curve.
•	 Within 100 feet of an intersection, a railroad 
crossing, or a tunnel.
•	 When you see any pavement marking or-
sign indicating NO PASSING.
•	 When your view of the road is reduced or 
obstructed by fog, snow, or rain.
Many head-on collisions occur while one ve-
hicle is passing another. Even while driving in 
the left lane of a four-lane highway, be aware 
that you might collide with a vehicle going the 
wrong way.
LANE CHANGES
If you must change lanes, make sure the lane 
is clear and signal your movement. If possi-
ble, avoid changing lanes within an intersec-
tion. Be sure to keep a safe following distance 
(safe space) from the vehicle ahead of you. 
Check your mirrors and look over your shoul-
der for vehicles behind you and already in the 
other lane. Be aware of “blind spots” or areas 
where mirrors fail to pick up approaching traf-
fic. Signal prior to making the lane change. 
Change only one lane at a time and be sure 
to cancel your signal when you complete the 
lane change.
Remember: The driver of the vehicle mak-
ing the lane change is responsible for safely 
changing lanes.
FOLLOWING AND STOPPING 
DISTANCES
If you drive too fast or follow too close, you 
will not have enough time to stop in an emer-
gency. At 55 miles per hour, it takes approxi-
mately 300 feet or one city block on dry pave-
ment to stop.
When one vehicle follows another, there must 
be enough distance between them to allow 
for a passing vehicle to come into that space 
without any danger. If the vehicle in front of 

22
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
TURNING
When making any turn, you should check 
both ways for traffic and pedestrians. You 
must also signal continuously for the last 100 
feet before the turn.
When approaching an intersection to make a 
right turn, stay as far to the right as possible. 
Make the turn close to the right curb.
To turn left from a one-way road onto a two-way 
road, begin in the left turn lane and complete 
the turn as indicated in the picture.
To turn left from a one-way to a one-way, be-
gin the turn from the left lane. Make the turn 
close to the left curb.
When turning left from a two-way road onto 
a two-way road, begin as close to the cen-
terline as possible and complete the turn as 
indicated in the picture.
you suddenly stops, you should be far enough 
behind so that you can come to a stop safely.
The “three-second rule” is a way to mea-
sure the distance that you should use as a 
cushion when following another vehicle. Here 
is how it works:
•	 Pick a shadow, mark, or object on or near 
the road ahead.
•	 When the rear bumper of the vehicle ahead 
of you passes the mark, start counting the 
seconds it takes you to reach the same 
spot. Count “one-thousand-and-one, one-
thousand-and-two, one-thousand-and-three.”
•	 If you reach the spot before you count “one-
thousand-and-three,” you are following too 
closely.
Sometimes you need even more following 
distance, as much as four or more seconds. 
This is especially true when:
•	 The roads are slippery.
•	 Following motorcycles.
•	 You have a heavy load or are pulling a trail-
er.
•	 Following large vehicles that block your 
view ahead.
•	 The driver behind you wants to pass.
•	 Following drivers whose view to the rear is 
blocked.

23
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
To turn left from a two-way road onto a one-
way road, approach the turn with your left 
wheels close to the centerline of the road. 
Make the turn before reaching the center of 
the intersection, and enter the left lane of the 
one-way road.
To turn left from a two-way road onto a four-
lane highway, approach the turn with your left 
wheels close to the centerline of the road. 
Make the turn so that you enter the passing 
lane of the four-lane highway. When traffic 
permits, move to the right, out of the passing 
lane.
ROUNDABOUTS
A roundabout is a circular intersection where 
vehicles travel around a center island in a 
counter-clockwise direction. These intersec-
tions are designed to reduce the number and 
severity of collisions, as well as provide oper-
ational efficiencies in the flow of traffic. When 
approaching a roundabout, perform the fol-
lowing steps:
1.	Reduce your speed.
2.	If more than one lane exists, use the left 
lane to turn left, the right lane to turn right, 
and all lanes to go through unless directed 
otherwise by signs and pavement mark-
ings.
3.	Yield to pedestrians and bicyclists.
4.	Yield to circulating traffic when entering the 
roundabout.
5.	Stay in your lane within the roundabout.
6.	Always assume trucks need all available 
space—do not pass them!
7.	Clear the roundabout to allow emergen-
cy vehicles to pass and do not enter the 
roundabout if one is approaching.
Large Vehicles
Roundabouts are designed to accommodate 
all vehicle types, including truck and trailer 
combinations. To assist large trucks, the cen-
ter island includes an apron to accommodate 
the rear wheels of the vehicle.
INTERSTATE DRIVING
Speeds are higher on the Interstate than on 
city streets. Because of this, your vehicle will 
travel further during your reaction time. To 
drive safely on the Interstate, you should:
•	 Be alert. Use your mirrors so that you know 
what is behind you as well as what is in front 
of you.

24
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
•	 When changing lanes, use your turn sig-
nals and make sure the lane is clear. When 
passing, do not cut back into the right lane 
too quickly.
•	 Keep to the right if you are traveling slowly.
•	 Never stop on the traveled part of the road-
way. In an emergency, stop on the shoulder, 
and raise your hood to show difficulty.
•	 Avoid driving when you are tired.
•	 Dim your lights when following another ve-
hicle.
INTERCHANGES
Different states use different names for the 
ramps used for getting on and off the inter-
state highway. For convenience, we call them 
interchanges. The two most common types of 
interchanges are the diamond and the clover-
leaf.
For all interchanges, you must remember:
•	 Highway guide signs tell you the location 
of interchanges well in advance. Watch for 
these signs. Move into the proper lane be-
fore you reach your interchange.
•	 Never back up on the Interstate. If you miss 
your interchange, go on to the next one. Do 
not use median crossovers. These are for 
authorized vehicles only such as emergen-
cy and maintenance vehicles.
•	 Never back up on a ramp. If you exit at the 
wrong interchange, you must follow it out. 
Return to the highway by the “on” ramp.
Entrance ramps allow you to adjust your 
speed to merge safely with the flow of traf-
fic on the highway. Stopping on these ramps 
should be avoided. Only stop when there is 
no opening in the traffic flow.
Unless posted signs indicate otherwise, any 
vehicle entering a freeway from an entrance 
ramp must yield the right of way to vehicles 
on the main roadway.
Exit ramps are for leaving or exiting from the 
highway. You should never stop or back up on 
these ramps.
NIGHT DRIVING
Night driving tends to be more difficult than 
daytime driving. You can only see as far as 
your headlights, and this cuts down on your 
time to react. Be mindful not to overdrive your 
headlights. You should:
•	 Use your headlights from sunset to sunrise, 
and at any other time necessary for safe driv-
ing.
•	 Use your headlights during inclement weath-
er when visibility is less than 1,000 feet due 
to rain, snow, sleet, hail, smoke, or fog.
•	 Slow down. You should be able to stop in the 
distance covered by your headlights even if 
you come up on a vehicle without taillights, 
or a parked vehicle with its lights on.
•	 Clean your windshield inside and out; this 
will reduce the amount of glare from oncom-
ing vehicles. Clean the headlights on your 
vehicle; this will naturally give more light 
and help you see vehicles and other night 
hazards better.
•	 Eyestrain, fatigue, and lack of concentration 

25
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
Parallel Parking
When parallel parking your vehicle, your 
wheels should be parallel to the right-hand 
curb and within one foot of the right-hand curb.
Here are some parallel parking hints:
1.	Signal your move-
ment and stop even 
with the vehicle 
ahead and about two 
feet away from it.
2.	Turn your wheel to 
the right and back 
slowly toward the 
vehicle behind.
3.	When clear of the 
vehicle ahead, turn 
your wheel to the 
left and back slowly 
toward the 
vehicle behind you.
4.	Turn your wheel to 
the right and pull 
ahead toward the 
curb. Stop in the 
center of the park-
ing space. Put your 
vehicle in park.
can be the result of staring at the spot creat-
ed by your headlights. Keep your eyes mov-
ing, especially at night. Scan for animals, 
pedestrians, and bicycle riders. Pay close 
attention at dawn and dusk for animals, es-
pecially for deer. Drive at slower speeds in 
areas where deer crossing signs are posted. 
Do not swerve to avoid an animal because 
this could result in a more serious crash like 
hitting a tree or another vehicle, or possi-
bly rolling over. Check to the sides for lights 
from other vehicles that might be crossing 
or entering the roadway ahead of you. Con-
stantly check the taillights of vehicles ahead 
for any indication that they are changing 
speed or lane position.
•	 	Dim your headlights at least 500 feet before 
meeting traffic and within 300 feet when fol-
lowing another vehicle. If you meet a vehicle 
that does not dim its lights, look to the right 
edge of the road to avoid being blinded. Re-
member, it takes time for your eyes to ad-
just after meeting a vehicle at night.
•	 Watch carefully for pedestrians. They may 
be wearing dark clothing and be difficult to 
see.
•	 Stop and rest if you are tired.
PARKING
Parking on a Hill
YOUR BRIGHT LIGHTS COULD 
BLIND AN APPROACHING DRIVER
DOWNHILL 
TURN WHEELS 
TOWARD CURB
UPHILL 
TURN WHEELS 
AWAY FROM 
CURB
UPHILL NO CURB 
TURN WHEELS 
TOWARD SHOULDER

26
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Leaving a Parking Space
When you leave a parking space:
1.	 Look to the rear over your shoulder as well as 
in the rear-view mirror.
2.	Signal before you start to move.
3.	Yield the right of way to oncoming vehicles.
4.	Enter traffic in the nearest lane, and remain 
in that lane until safe to change to another 
lane.
Emergency Parking
When you have to make an emergency stop, 
park with all four wheels off the traveled pave-
ment, if possible.
Between one-half hour after sunset and one-
half hour before sunrise, your vehicle must 
display at least one white or amber lamp in 
front and a red light on the rear, both visible 
for a distance of 1,000 feet when parked on a 
public highway.
Do Not Park:
•	 On a sidewalk or in front of a driveway.
•	 On or within 10 feet of a crosswalk at an 
intersection.
•	 Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
•	 Within an intersection.
•	 On the street side of a parked vehicle. This 
violation is called double parking.
•	 On a bridge, overpass, or in a tunnel or un-
derpass.
•	 Within 15 feet of a flashing beacon, a stop 
sign, or a traffic control signal placed on the 
side of the roadway.
•	 Between a safety zone and the curb next 
to it or within 15 feet of points on the curb 
immediately opposite the ends of a safety 
zone. Safety zones are marked areas set 
aside for pedestrians.
•	 Alongside or opposite street excavation 
when parking would obstruct traffic.
•	 Anywhere there is an official “No Parking” 
sign.
•	 In a designated Accessible Parking space 
unless in possession of the appropriate 
placard or ‘Accessible’ license plate. Do not 
park on the diagonal lines next to the space.
TOWING
Whether you are towing a camping trailer, a 
utility trailer, or a boat trailer, the increased 
weight from the trailer will lengthen the dis-
tance necessary to stop your vehicle.
•	 When traveling faster than 25 miles per 
hour, you need safety chains or brakes ca-
pable of holding the trailer if the coupling 
breaks.
•	 You need turn signals, stop lights, two red 
reflectors, and two red taillights mounted on 
the rear of the trailer and visible for a dis-
tance of 1,000 feet. For more details, see 
the Motor Vehicle Registrar, North Dakota 
Department of Transportation, 608 East 
Boulevard Avenue, Bismarck, North Dakota 
58505-0700, phone 328-2725.
•	 You need two amber clearance lamps on 
the front and two red clearance lights on the 
back of your trailer if it is 80 inches or more 
in width.
•	 Every vehicle must have a mirror allowing 
you to see at least 200 feet to the rear.
•	 If you are towing another vehicle, the draw-
bar or connection between any two vehi-
cles, one of which is towing or drawing the 
others on a highway, shall be of such de-
sign, strength, and construction to prevent 
the unintentional uncoupling of the vehicles.
•	 For your safety, it is better to slow down 
when you are towing a trailer in a strong 
wind.
COASTING PROHIBITED
•	 The driver of any motor vehicle, when travel-
ing upon a downgrade, may not coast with the 
gears or transmission of such vehicle in neutral.
•	 The driver of a truck or bus, when traveling upon 

27
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
a downgrade, may not coast with the clutch 
disengaged.
BACKING
When backing your vehicle is necessary, it 
must be done without interfering with other 
traffic. You are responsible for backing onto a 
lane of traffic safely.
You must also be careful so that you do not 
back into children or other obstacles. To be 
safe, before backing you should walk around 
your vehicle to check for clearance.
LITTERING
If you throw or deposit any litter on any public 
highway, you are subject to a $500 fine.
CRASH REPORTS
If you are involved in a crash that results in 
the combined damage of $4,000 or more, or 
results in personal injury or death, you must:
•	 Immediately report it to the local police if 
you are in a city.
•	 Immediately report it to the Highway Patrol 
or the County Sheriff’s Office if you are out-
side city limits.
In all crashes involving injury or damage, the 
drivers must exchange the following informa-
tion: driver’s name, address, motor vehicle in-
surance company, and policy number.
Whenever the driver is physically incapable 
of giving notice of a crash and also is not the 
owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the 
vehicle involved shall, within five days after 
learning of the crash, give notice and insur-
ance information not given by the driver.
Any driver who hits an unattended vehicle 
must immediately locate and notify the own-
er. If the owner cannot be found, the driver 
must leave a note at a conspicuous place on 
the unattended vehicle. The note must list the 
driver’s name, address, and motor vehicle in-
surance company.
LIABILITY INSURANCE
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in the 
state of North Dakota without a valid policy of 
liability insurance in effect. The name of the 
motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the 
policy number of the driver must be furnished 
to a law enforcement officer upon request. The 
fine for operating an uninsured motor vehicle 
is $150 for a first violation and $300 for a sec-
ond or subsequent violation in three years and 
may result in a license suspension. If a person 
is convicted of “No Liability Insurance,” that 
person will be required to provide proof of li-
ability insurance to the division for one year. 
The person will also be required to purchase 
a duplicate driver’s license with the “Proof of 
Liability Insurance” restriction. The cost of this 
duplicate license is $50. There will also be a 
cost of $50 to have the restriction removed at 
the end of the one-year period.
FOR EMERGENCY HIGHWAY ASSISTANCE 
DIAL 911
FOR WEATHER AND ROAD CONDITIONS 
DIAL 511
DRIVING SKILLS AND EMERGENCY 
SITUATIONS
Whenever you drive you must be alert. Al-
ways watch for and be prepared to react to 
a possible emergency situation. As a driver, 
there will be situations when you will need to 
reduce your speed immediately—sometimes 
to regain control of your vehicle and other 
times to come to a complete stop.
Remember: Brakes work best just before your 
tires start to skid or slide on the road surface.
WINTER DRIVING
Winter driving can create hazardous driving 
conditions. The driver must be prepared for 
these conditions, and follow additional safe 
driving practices.
•	 It is not legal to enter a road that is officially 
closed due to hazardous conditions. The 
penalty for doing this is a $250 fine.
•	 Keep the windshield clear. Allow the de-

28
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
froster to warm up properly while scraping 
the ice off windows. The windshield wash-
ing fluid should contain an anti-freeze solu-
tion; however, at high speeds in very cold 
temperatures, the fluid may freeze on the 
windshield and totally obscure your vision.
•	 Get the feel of the roadway. Try your brakes 
while driving slowly and adjust your speed 
to how much traction you have.
•	 Slow down. Snow tires or tire chains are help-
ful, but you should still double your distance 
for following other vehicles. Studded snow 
tires may be used from October 15 to April 15.
•	 Passing trucks may create snow fog. This 
greatly reduces your visibility. Look ahead 
for curves in the road, look behind for ve-
hicles following, and slow down.
•	 Remember that on bridges and shaded 
spots, frost and ice form quicker and are re-
tained longer than on the rest of the roadway.
•	 To stop on ice, you should pump the brakes 
when driving vehicles equipped with drum-
type brakes on all four wheels. Vehicles 
equipped with disc brakes require a slow, 
intermittent braking action—fully on and 
then fully off—long enough to let the disc 
brakes release so that all wheels are roll-
ing again. If you slam on your brakes, your 
wheels will lock and your tires will skid.
•	 Keep firm and continuous pressure on anti-
lock brakes (ABS). Manually pumping anti-
lock brakes, or letting up on them, decreas-
es their effectiveness because it turns the 
system off and on.
•	 Carry a winter survival kit in your vehicle: 
warm clothing, footwear, shovel, energy 
food, etc.
•	 If your vehicle becomes stuck in a snow-
storm, stay with the vehicle! Most deaths 
occur when people leave their vehicles and 
get lost. Open your windows slightly and run 
the vehicle and heater for only short periods 
of time to avoid carbon monoxide poison-
ing. Stay active and do not panic.
Meeting Snow Removal Equipment
Here are a few suggestions to help you recog-
nize winter driving hazards while plow trucks 
are working:
•	 Stay well back from snowplows. Sometimes 
they have to stop and back up. Plow drivers 
can’t see directly behind themselves, and 
plows also throw sanding material. Remem-
ber, don’t crowd the plow!
•	 Know where the plow is on multi-lane road-
ways. The plow could be in either lane or on 
the shoulder.
•	 Be extremely cautious when passing a 
snowplow. They can be moved sideways by 
drifts and hard snow-pack.
•	 Never drive through “whiteouts” caused by 
crosswinds or plowing light snow. Snow-
plows pull over and stop frequently to allow 
traffic to pass. Be patient and wait until you 
can see.
•	 Watch for plow trucks on Interstate ramps 
and turning around on “authorized vehicle 
only” cross-overs.
•	 Don’t assume you’ll have good traction be-
cause the road “looks” sanded. The sand can 
sink into the snow-pack, leaving a slick surface.
•	 Slow down and drive according to the con-
ditions. Most winter crashes are caused by 
driving too fast for conditions.

29
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
SKIDS
Most skids are the result of driving too fast for 
the road conditions on slippery roadways. The 
key to safe vehicle operation is slower speeds. 
In rear-wheel drive automobiles, you should 
stay off the brakes and gradually ease off 
the accelerator. Turn your wheels in the 
direction the rear end of your vehicle is 
skidding. If the rear end of the vehicle skids 
right, steer right. If the rear end of the vehicle 
skids left, steer left.
When front-wheel drive vehicles start to 
skid when traveling at moderate speeds, you 
should accelerate slightly and steer in the 
direction you want to go. If there is no room 
to accelerate, shift into neutral or push in the 
clutch. Remember, front-wheel drive vehicles 
have positive, accurate, and quick steering; 
the vehicle goes exactly where you point it.
Four-wheel drive vehicles have a tendency 
of giving the driver a false sense of security. 
Therefore, slower speeds on slippery surfac-
es are extremely important. When traveling 
at moderate speeds, you should accelerate 
and steer into the direction of the skid. 
At higher speeds, or in the event there is no 
room to accelerate, you should push in the 
clutch or with automatic transmission vehi-
cles, shift into neutral.
RAIN
A hard surface roadway is very slippery just 
TO CORRECT
SKID
after it starts raining. Water combines with the 
road dirt and oil to form a slick film between 
your tires and the roadway surface.
When the water on the roadway becomes 
deeper, another hazardous situation occurs: 
hydroplaning. This occurs when your tires 
ride on the water and not on roadway surface.
Rain reduces visibility and increases the pos-
sibility of a dangerous skid. Slow down and 
be alert.
FLOODING
Flooding can occur when streams and rivers 
flow over their banks, when dams or levees 
break, when there is run-off from deep snow 
or any time there is heavy rainfall. Floodwa-
ters can be found on roads, bridges and low 
areas. Flash floods can come rapidly and un-
expectedly. They can occur within a few min-
utes or hours of excessive rainfall.
•	 It is not legal to enter a road that is officially 
closed due to hazardous conditions. The 
penalty for doing this is a $250 fine.
•	 Do not drive through flooded areas. If you 
see a flooded roadway ahead, turn around 
and find another route to get to your desti-
nation.
•	 Be cautious, especially at night, when the 
visibility is limited.
•	 Remember, six inches of water will reach 
the bottom of most passenger cars, causing 
loss of control or possible stalling.
•	 Two feet of moving water can carry away 
most vehicles including sport utility vehicles 
and pick-up trucks.
•	 Even if the water appears shallow enough 
to cross, do not attempt to cross a flooded 
road. Water can hide dips, or worse, flood-
waters can damage roadways by washing 
away the underlying road surface.
•	 If there is no other route, proceed to higher 
ground and wait for the water to subside.

30
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
FLAT TIRE OR BLOWOUTS
While you are driving, if one of your tires be-
comes flat or you have a blowout, you might 
lose control of your vehicle. The warning sign 
to listen for is a thumping sound. If a front tire 
blows out, your vehicle will pull in the direc-
tion of the blown tire. A flat rear tire will cause 
the vehicle to sway back and forth.
To regain control, grasp the steering wheel 
tightly and steer straight ahead. Ease up on 
the accelerator, but do not brake until you have 
regained full control. Turn onto the shoulder 
when your vehicle is almost stopped.
RUNNING OFF THE PAVEMENT
If your tire drops off the edge of the pavement 
onto the shoulder, do not try to swerve back 
onto the pavement because you may lose 
control of your vehicle.
Grip the steering wheel and ease up on the 
accelerator. If you brake hard, you may go 
into a skid. After you have slowed down and 
are in complete control, look for traffic behind 
you, signal, and turn gently back onto the 
pavement.
EQUIPMENT FAILURE
If your headlights suddenly fail, try your park-
ing lights and turn signals and leave the road-
way as soon as you have slowed down. Re-
member, without lights other drivers can no 
longer see you.
If your windshield wipers fail in rain or snow, 
slow down and stick your head out your side 
window in order to see as you leave the road-
way.
If your accelerator pedal sticks, depress the 
clutch or shift it into neutral. You may also turn 
the engine off; however, this may result in the 
loss of power steering and power brakes. 
Never turn your vehicle’s ignition to the “lock” 
position while it is still in motion. This will 
cause the steering to lock if you try to turn the 
steering wheel. When you can do so safely, 
steer to the side of the road.
Brakes do their best job just before the tires 
lock and start to skid or slide on the road sur-
face.
READING THE ROAD
As an operator, you must adjust your speed 
to fit the weather, traffic conditions, and the 
condition of the road. Slow down when you 
are driving where there are ruts, holes, bro-
ken pavement, or other objects on the road. 
Do not slam on your brakes or steer hard to 
avoid these obstacles.
Driving on loose gravel is harder than driving 
on pavement because your tires don’t have the 
traction needed to give you stable control. Slow 
down and avoid sudden changes in direction.
Should an oncoming vehicle cross into your 
lane, slow down and try to warn the oncoming 
driver by flashing your headlights. If the ve-
hicle keeps coming, pull as far to the right as 
possible. If there could be a collision, steer off 
the road to the right when conditions permit, 
or stop on the far right shoulder of the road.
DISTRACTED DRIVING
Driving requires your full attention. It is not 
legal for anyone to text (composing,  reading, 
or sending an electronic message) while driv-
ing or fail to maintain control of a motor vehi-
cle due to activity that is not necessary to the 
operation of the vehicle and actually impairs, 
or would reasonably be expected to impair, 
the ability of the individual to safely operate 
the vehicle. The penalty is a $100 fine. 
DRIVING POSTURE
Drive with both hands holding the steering 
wheel. You never know when evasive action 
may be needed. So be ready. Use one foot to 
operate both the gas pedal and brake pedal 
to avoid riding the brakes which can cause 
them to overheat.
FATIGUE
Fatigue (being tired) increases the chance of 
a crash. If you are sleepy, the only safe cure 
is to get some sleep. If you don’t, you risk 
your life and the lives of others. Danger signs 

31
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
of fatigue are: difficulty in focusing or keeping 
eyes open, inability to recall the last few miles 
driven, having the sense of being detached or 
watching the vehicle being driven rather than 
driving it, crossing the centerline or dropping 
off the edge of the pavement, missing traffic 
signs or lights, tailgating or following other ve-
hicles more closely than you normally would, 
forgetting to dim headlights, excessive yawn-
ing, and inability to hold head up (nodding off).
SHARING THE ROAD WITH TRUCKS
It may sound obvious, but trucks are not large 
cars. To reduce the chance of a crash with a 
large tractor-trailer, the so-called “18-wheel-
er,” drivers must be familiar with a truck’s 
physical capabilities and common maneu-
vers.
Braking
Tractor-trailers take longer to stop than a car 
traveling at the same speed. A fully-loaded 
tractor-trailer may take more than 400 feet on 
dry pavement to come to a complete stop, or 
more than the length of a football field.
Turning
With any turning vehicle, the rear wheels fol-
low a shorter path than the front wheels. The 
longer the vehicle, the greater the difference. 
That’s why the drivers of tractor-trailers must 
often swing out to the left as the first step in 
making a right turn. When following a tractor-
trailer, observe its turn signals before trying 
to pass. If it appears to be starting a left turn, 
wait a moment to check and see which way 
the driver is signaling he’s going to turn be-
fore passing on the right.
A Trucker’s Blind Spots (the “No-Zone”)
It is important to be seen whenever you are 
driving. Many drivers falsely assume that a 
trucker can see the road better because they 
sit twice as high as the driver of a car. While 
truckers do enjoy a better forward view and 
have bigger mirrors, they still have serious 
blind spots or no-zones into which a car can 
disappear from view—up to 20 feet in front of 
the cab, on either side of the tractor-trailer, 
particularly alongside the cab, and up to 200 
feet in the rear.
BLIND
SPOT
1 Lane
2 Lanes
BLIND
SPOT
30 ft
18 ft
Blind spots can be deadly!
Stay out of the no-zone. It could save your life.

32
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Drivers lingering in the blind spots on the 
sides and in the rear hamper a trucker’s abil-
ity to take evasive action to avoid a danger-
ous situation—and the possibility of a crash is 
increased. An excellent rule of thumb for driv-
ers sharing the road with a tractor-trailer is, “If 
you can’t see the truck driver in his or her side 
mirror, he or she can’t see you.”
Maneuverability
Trucks are designed to carry many products to and 
from towns and cities; they are not designed to 
be as maneuverable as cars. Trucks have longer 
stopping and accelerating distances, wider turning 
radii, and weigh more. On multi-lane highways, 
tractor-trailers stay in the center lane to help the 
flow of local traffic on and off the highway. Staying 
in the middle lane also increases the truck driver’s 
options if he or she has to switch lanes in order to 
avoid a dangerous situation or a crash.
Following is a list of some of the most common 
mistakes drivers must avoid when driving around 
trucks.
•	 	Cutting off a truck in traffic or on the high-
way to reach your exit or turn. Cutting into 
the open space in front of a truck removes 
the truck driver’s cushion of safety. Trying 
to beat a truck to a single-lane construction 
zone represents a particularly dangerous 
situation. Take a moment to slow down and 
exit behind a truck—it will only take you a 
few extra seconds.
•	 Don’t linger alongside a truck when passing. 
Always pass a tractor-trailer completely and 
always on the left side. If you linger when 
passing any vehicle, your position makes 
it impossible for the trucker to take evasive 
action if an obstacle appears on the road 
ahead.
•	 Following too close or tailgating. When fol-
lowing behind a truck, if you can’t see the 
truck driver’s rearview mirrors, there is no 
way the truck driver can see you. Tailgat-
ing a truck or car is dangerous because you 
take away your own cushion of safety if the 
vehicle in front of you stops short—and if 
the vehicle you are following hits something 
on the road, you will have no time to react 
before it hits the front of your car.
•	 Never underestimate the size and speed of 
an approaching tractor-trailer. Because of 
its large size, a tractor-trailer often appears 
to be traveling at a slower speed than it is. 
A substantial number of car-truck collisions 
take place at intersections because the 
driver of the car does not realize how close 
the truck is or how quickly it is approaching.
MOVE OVER
If a motor vehicle is stranded along the inter-
state or multilane highway outside city limits, 
with flashing hazard lights, a driver approach-
ing or passing this vehicle should yield the 
right of way and move safely to the lane not 
adjacent to the stranded vehicle. If only lane 
available to move safely to is the adjacent 
lane to the stranded vehicle, proceed with 
caution and reduce speed.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH 
MOTORCYCLES
Motorcyclists have the same rights and re-
sponsibilities on public roadways as other 
drivers. Special conditions and situations of-
ten cause greater problems for motorcyclists. 
Drivers should be aware of these problems 
so they can more safely share the roadway 
with motorcyclists.
Special Hazards
•	 Allow the motorcyclist a full lane width. 
Although it may seem as though there is 
enough room in the traffic lane for an au-
tomobile and a motorcycle, remember the 
motorcycle needs the room to maneuver 
safely. Do not share the lane.
•	 Approximately one-half of all motorcycle 
crashes involve another motor vehicle. 
Nearly 40 percent were caused by the other 
vehicle turning left in front of the motorcy-
clist.
•	 Motorcycles are small and may be difficult 
to see. Motorcycles have a much smaller 
profile than other vehicles, which can make 
it more difficult to judge the speed and dis-
tance of an approaching motorcycle.

33
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
•	 Always signal your intentions before chang-
ing lanes or merging with traffic. This allows 
the motorcyclist to anticipate traffic flow and 
find a safe lane position.
•	 Remember that motorcyclists are often hid-
den in a vehicle’s blind spot or missed in 
a quick look due to their smaller size. Al-
ways make a visual check for motorcycles 
by checking mirrors and blind spots before 
entering or leaving a lane of traffic and at 
intersections.
•	 Don’t be fooled by a flashing turn signal 
on a  motorcycle—motorcycle signals usu-
ally are not self cancelling and riders some-
times forget to turn them off. Wait to be sure 
the motorcycle is going to turn before you 
proceed.
•	 Remember that road conditions which are 
minor annoyances to you pose major haz-
ards to motorcyclists. Motorcyclists may 
change speed or adjust their position within 
a lane suddenly in reaction to road and traf-
fic conditions such as potholes, gravel, wet 
or slippery surfaces, pavement seams, rail-
road crossings, and grooved pavement.
•	 Allow more following distance, three or four 
seconds, following a motorcycle so the mo-
torcyclist has enough time to maneuver or 
stop in an emergency. In dry conditions, 
motorcycles can stop more quickly than a 
car.
Being aware of these situations can help you 
as a driver share the road safely with motor-
cyclists.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH BICYCLES
Bicyclists generally travel at slower speeds 
than motorists which can create special con-
siderations for sharing the road safely.
•	 Remember to reduce speed when encoun-
tering bicyclists.
•	 Recognize situations that may be poten-
tially dangerous to bicyclists and give them 
space.
•	 When passing, maintain a safe operating 
distance between your car and a bicyclist. 
The individual operating the motor vehicle 
is required to leave a minimum of three feet 
of passing space between the vehicle and 
bicycle. Pass a bicyclist only when road and 
traffic conditions dictate that it is safe to do 
so. Check over your shoulder after passing 
a bicyclist and before moving back t normal 
position. In inclement weather, give bicy-
clists extra room.
•	 Scan for bicyclists in traffic, particularly at 
intersections. Most crashes involving a mo-
tor vehicle and a bicyclist occur at intersec-
tions. Allow bicyclists extra time to cross in-
tersections.
•	 When turning right, check your blind spot 
for bicyclists before initiating the turn. 
•	 Avoid driving in designated bicycle lanes 
other than to make a right turn. Do so safely; 
signal and look before moving into the bi-
cycle lane on approach to your turn.
•	 Children on bicycles are often unpredict-
able and may not have adequate knowl-
edge of traffic laws. Children may be harder 
to see because they are typically smaller 
than adults. So, expect the unexpected and 
slow down!
SEAT BELTS
There is no good excuse for not wearing seat 
belts. Seat belts have been proven to be one of 
the most effective safety devices today. Most of 
the traffic deaths and serious injuries occur when 
the driver and passengers are ejected or are 
thrown onto the dashboard. Your chances of be-
ing killed are four times greater if you are thrown 
from the vehicle. Seat belts help keep vehicle oc-
cupants in place, reducing the chance of death or 
injury. This is not only for highway driving. In fact, 
crashes causing injury are most likely to occur at 
speeds less than 40 miles per hour and within 25 
miles of home. At 30 miles per hour, the force is 
like hitting the ground from the top of a three-sto-
ry building. Drivers have much to gain by taking 
a few seconds to fasten their seat belts. Not only 
do seat belts protect you, but seat belts help you 
maintain proper riding and driving posture mak-
ing you feel less tired after a trip.

34
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Belts must be worn correctly. Lap belts should 
lie snug and low across the hips, not across 
the abdomen. Shoulder belts should lie 
across the chest and over the collarbone with 
minimal, if any, slack.
Automatic seat belts automatically move into 
place around front-seat occupants when the 
car doors are closed. A separate lap belt must 
be fastened manually to provide sufficient 
protection with automatic shoulder belts.
Wear Your Belt Correctly
North Dakota’s seat belt law requires all oc-
cupants to wear seat belts in all seating posi-
tions.
AIR BAGS
Air bags are designed to provide supplemen-
tal protection for belted front-seat occupants 
in a frontal crash. Lap/shoulder belts must al-
ways be used in conjunction with an airbag to 
protect occupants in side-impact and roll-over 
crashes. Air bags work best when everyone 
is buckled and children, especially those age 
12 and younger, are properly restrained in 
the back seat. If you transport children, check 
the vehicle and child restraint manufacturers’ 
recommendations for child restraint use in ve-
hicles with side air bags.
CHILD RESTRAINTS (Car Safety Seats)
Motor vehicle crashes are a leading cause of 
death and injury for children in North Dakota. 
YES!
NO!
NO!
NO!
Tragically, most deaths and injuries can be 
prevented with the proper use of car safety 
seats and seat belts.
North Dakota’s child passenger safety law re-
quires:
•	 Children under eight years of age must be 
properly secured in a child restraint (car 
seat or booster seat).  A seat belt may be 
substituted for children who are at least 57 
inches tall.
•	 Children ages eight through seventeen 
must be properly secured in a seat belt or 
child restraint.
•	 Child restraints and seat belts must be used 
correctly following the manufacturer’s in-
structions.
The penalty for violation is $25 and one point 
against the license of the driver.
Incorrectly-used car seats may not protect a 
child in a crash. Follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions and vehicle owner’s manual ex-
actly. Correct use of a child restraint includes 
(1) installing the car seat tightly in the vehicle 
with the safety belt or LATCH system and (2) 
snugly securing the child in the car safety 
seat.
Other child passenger safety tips:
•	 Children under age 13 should ride in the 
back seat —even if the vehicle does not 
have an airbag.
•	 Never place a rear-facing infant car seat in 
front of an airbag.
•	 Children should be at least 40 pounds and 
at least 4 years of age to move from a car 
seat to a booster seat.
•	 Never allow children to ride in the cargo 
area of a pickup truck.
•	 Never buckle two children into one seat belt.
For more information, contact the North Da-
kota Department of Health at www.ndhealth.
gov/injury/ or call 1-800-472-2286.

35
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
HEATSTROKE
Heatstroke is one of the leading causes of 
non-crash-related fatalities among children. 
Vehicle heatstroke occurs when a child is left 
in a vehicle, allowing for the child’s body tem-
perature to rise in a quick and deadly manner. 
Heatstroke begins when the core body tem-
perature reaches about 104 degrees and the 
thermoregulatory system is overwhelmed. A 
core body temperature of about 107 degrees 
is lethal. Unfortunately, even great parents 
can forget a child in the back seat. Other risk 
factors include caregivers who are not used 
to driving kids, or whose routine suddenly 
changes. Whether you are a parent, care-
giver, or bystander of a child left in a vehicle, 
it is vitally important to understand children 
are more vulnerable to heatstroke than adults 
are.
Even in cooler temperatures, your vehicle 
can heat up to dangerous temperatures very 
quickly. An outside temperature in the mid-
60s can cause a vehicle’s inside temperature 
to rise above 110 degrees Fahrenheit. The 
inside temperature of a vehicle can rise al-
most 20 degrees Fahrenheit within the first 10 
minutes.
HEATSTROKE PREVENTION TIPS
•	 	Look before you lock. Make it a habit to look 
in your back seat before you lock.
•	 	Keep your vehicle locked and keep your 
keys out of reach. Nationally, nearly 3 in 10 
heatstroke deaths happen when an unat-
tended child gains access to a vehicle.
•	 	Take action if you notice a child alone in a 
vehicle.
It is never okay to leave a child alone in a ve-
hicle for any amount of time, as it can lead to 
tragedy. These deaths, while accidental, are 
always preventable.
DRINKING, DRUGS, AND DRIVING
ALCOHOL
More traffic deaths on the nation’s highways 
are caused by alcohol than any other single 
cause. In North Dakota, nearly half of the 
traffic deaths involve drivers who have been 
drinking prior to the crash. There is evidence 
proving that if you drink—even just a little—
your chances of a crash are seven times 
greater than if you were completely sober.
Alcohol is a drug that slows the activity of the 
brain. When alcohol enters the stomach, it 
goes directly into the blood and other parts 
of the body. It reduces the amount of oxygen 
that reaches the brain cells.
Alcohol directly affects a person’s ability 
to drive. When a person drinks increasing 
amounts of alcohol, the degree of impairment 
and the intensity of the effect will rise rapidly.
The amount or concentration of alcohol in the 
blood or breath is known as Alcohol Concen-
tration or AC. Three factors influence a per-
son’s AC:
1.	THE ALCOHOL CONTENT. In the “aver-
age drink” the alcohol content is about the 
same whether it’s a 12-ounce can of beer, 
a 4-ounce glass of wine, or a 1-ounce glass 
of scotch or whiskey. Remember that, in 
reality, mixed drinks at home or in a lounge 
VARY a great degree. Drinks at a private 
party tend to be quite a bit stronger.
2.	THE PERIOD OF TIME OVER WHICH 
THE ALCOHOL WAS CONSUMED. The 
more alcohol you consume the longer it 
takes to sober up. Time is the only way to 
eliminate alcohol from the blood stream. 
This process is relatively slow and will not 
be quickened by drinking coffee, taking 
cold showers, or exercising.
3.	THE PERSON’S LEAN BODY WEIGHT. 
Larger people have more blood and flu-
ids which will dilute the alcohol consumed 
more than in a smaller person.
EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL
1.	Alcohol slows down reactions.
2.	Alcohol impairs vision.
3.	Alcohol interferes with concentration.

36
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
 
4.	Alcohol dulls judgment.
5.	Alcohol creates a false sense of confi-
dence.
Alcohol is a drug that depresses the central 
nervous system and slows down brain activ-
ity. Alcohol in the bloodstream slows reaction 
time, interferes with the driver’s vision, and 
causes dangerous situations to appear “not 
so dangerous.”
IMPLIED CONSENT
Upon receiving your license to operate a mo-
tor vehicle in North Dakota, you have given 
your consent to a chemical test to determine 
the level of alcohol and/or drug content in your 
blood, breath, urine, or saliva. If you refuse to 
take the test, your license will be revoked for 
180 days to three years. Remember: A chem-
ical test can help you. If you are not legally 
intoxicated, the test will show it.
DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE
If a chemical test reveals that you have eight 
one-hundredths of one percent (.08%) or 
greater of alcohol in your blood, or .02% if un-
der the age of 21, you are considered legally 
to be under the influence of alcohol. The pen-
alties for driving in this dangerous condition 
are harsh.
What will happen to your driving privi-
leges?
There are two separate penalties involved 
under the DUI law. One is an administrative 
license penalty, the other is a court conviction 
penalty. Your driving privileges may be sus-
pended through either or both processes.
•	 If you have an alcohol concentration (AC) of 
.08 percent or more or .02 percent or more 
if you are under age 21, your license will be 
suspended for:
	» 91 days, first offense in seven years
	» 180 days, first offense, AC .18 or greater 
in seven years
	» 365 days, second offense in seven years
	» two years, second offense, AC .18 or 
greater in seven years
	» two years, third and subsequent offense 
in seven years
	» three years, third and subsequent of-
fense, AC .18 or greater in seven years
•	 If you refuse to take either an AC test or a 
roadside preliminary breath test (PBT), your 
license will be revoked for 180 days to three 
years.
•	 Temporary restricted license can be issued 
after serving at least 30 days of suspension 
or after serving at least 14 days if participat-
ing in the 24/7 Sobriety Program. 
•	 Temporary restricted licenses can only be 
issued if within the past 7 years there has 
been a refusal or more than one alcohol/
drug related violation. Participation in the 
24/7 Sobriety Program is required until one 
year violation free.
There are also harsh penalties for driving 
while your license is suspended or revoked 
after an alcohol-related violation—four days 
mandatory minimum jail sentence and a fine 
of up to $1,000.
•	 The license plates and registration card 
for your vehicle may be impounded for the 
length of the suspension/revocation.
What happens if you’re convicted?
If convicted through the court process, in ad-
dition to losing your driving privilege, you also 
face mandatory fines and jail sentences.
•	 First conviction—$500 fine.
•	 First conviction if the AC is .16% or greater 
—at least $750 fine and two days impris-
onment. The term of imprisonment may be 
converted to community service.
•	 Second conviction within seven years 
—$1,000 fine and 10 days in jail and at least 
12 months in the 24/7 Sobriety Program as 
a mandatory condition of probation.
•	 Third conviction within seven years—$2,000 

37
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
fine and 120 days in jail and participation in 
the 24/7 Sobriety Program as a mandatory 
condition of probation.
•	 Fourth or subsequent offense—$2,000 fine 
and one year and one day in jail and par-
ticipation in the 24/7 Sobriety Program as a 
mandatory condition of probation.
In addition, all convicted offenders are re-
quired to submit to a mandatory alcohol ad-
diction evaluation and complete any rec-
ommended treatment. These are just the 
minimum penalties. It could be worse!
What happens if you cause a serious 
injury or death?
In addition to the minimum penalties for DUI, 
if you are involved in a crash and cause a se-
rious injury to another, you will spend an ad-
ditional 90 days in jail. If you cause the death 
of another, your time in jail is extended by one 
year.
What happens to your insurance?
If you refuse to take an AC test, or if convicted 
of a DUI, the law requires you to show proof 
of financial responsibility (SR 22 insurance 
coverage).
Typically, motor vehicle insurance is obtained 
to satisfy this requirement. Chances are your 
annual motor vehicle insurance rates could 
double—or even triple!
REPORTING IMPAIRED DRIVING
If you exhibit or encounter out-of-the-ordinary 
driving that would indicate alcohol impair-
ment, anyone can report this to law enforce-
ment by dialing 911.
OPEN CONTAINER LAW
It is illegal for anyone, driver or passenger, 
to drink alcoholic beverages in or on a mo-
tor vehicle. You cannot legally have an open 
container in your vehicle. The seal cannot be 
broken. Any open containers must be placed 
in the trunk of the vehicle.
MINOR IN POSSESSION/CONSUMPTION 
LAW
Persons under 21 years of age are prohibited 
from purchasing, consuming, or possessing 
alcoholic beverages.
DRUGS
Drugs and driving do not mix. Even certain 
cold tablets and capsules can affect your driv-
ing ability by making you drowsy at the wheel. 
Read all directions carefully.
As with alcohol, operating while under the in-
fluence of a narcotic drug is especially dan-
gerous. Not only do you endanger your life, 
but you also endanger the lives of others us-
ing the same road. The harsh penalties that 
deal with operating under the influence of al-
cohol also apply to narcotic drugs.
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC AND  
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
PEDESTRIANS
Traffic rules apply to pedestrians as well as 
motorists. Some special rules for pedestrians 
are listed below.
Remember: Joggers are considered pedestri-
ans and must also obey these rules.
Obey traffic signals. Walk in the crosswalks.
Do not start to cross the roadway on a flash-
ing “Don’t Walk” signal. If you are already in 
the intersection, move to the other side at a 
normal pace.
If you cross a road where there is no cross-
walk, you must yield the right of way to all ve-
hicles on the roadway.
Do not cross intersections diagonally unless 
an official traffic control device says you may.
Walk facing traffic. Use sidewalks when you 
can; if there are no sidewalks, get as far off 
the road as possible.
You have the right of way only in crosswalks. 
Yield to vehicles any place else. Use your 
common sense—yield if there is any danger.

38
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
ping (see page 16).
•	 Do not carry more people on a bicycle or 
motorized bicycle than it was designed to 
carry.
•	 All bicycles and motorized bicycles must be 
equipped with a brake.
•	 If under 18, an approved safety helmet is 
required to operate a motorized bicycle. A 
good practice is to wear a safety helmet 
while riding a bicycle and motorized bicycle 
regardless of age.
•	 It is a good idea to wear brightly-colored 
clothing to increase your visibility in traffic.
•	 	Only carry a package or bundle if it allows 
you to keep at least one hand on the han-
dlebar.
•	 Do not hold on to other moving vehicles for 
the purpose of being towed.
•	 At night, all bicycles must be equipped with a 
headlight visible from a distance of 500 feet. 
The bicycle must also have a red reflector 
on the rear. If equipped with a taillight, it 
must be visible for 500 feet to the rear.
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
The operator of an off-highway vehicle must 
be in possession of a valid driver’s license, 
permit, or an off-highway vehicle safety cer-
tificate issued by the North Dakota Parks and 
Recreation Department. For complete infor-
mation on minimum age requirements, call 
328-5357 or visit www.parkrec.nd.gov
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES RULES
There are a number of rules regulating the 
operation of an off-highway vehicle. Here are 
some of them:
•	 Persons under the age of 18 must wear a 
safety helmet that meets United States De-
partment of Transportation standards.
•	 Do not operate an off-highway vehicle on 
the roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or 
slope of any road, street, or highway except 
as provided in Chapter 39-29 of the North 
When you walk at night, walk facing traffic 
and wear light or white clothing. Make sure 
drivers can see you.
You are not allowed to stand on the traveled 
portion of the street or highway for the pur-
pose of hitchhiking.
Drivers must always be on the lookout for pe-
destrians. Be alert for children at play. For in-
stance, a ball rolling onto the street tells you a 
child might be chasing it. Your reactions might 
save a life.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Bicycles and Motorized Bicycles
Traffic laws apply to everyone. Whether you 
are driving a car, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, or 
motorized bicycle, you must always obey the 
same basic rules of the road.
A motorized bicycle is a two- or three-wheeled 
vehicle no more than 32 inches wide. It must 
also have:
1.	Foot pedals or footrests.
2.	Maximum piston or rotor displacement of 
49.98 cc. (3.05 cubic inches) enabling a 
speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour on 
a level surface.
3.	An automatic drive system not requiring 
the use of a clutch.
To operate a motorized bicycle, you must be 
at least 14 years of age or older and have in 
your immediate possession a valid operator’s 
license, motorized bicycle permit, operator 
permit, temporary permit, instruction permit, 
or motorcycle permit.
Rules and Guidelines
•	 Obey all traffic laws.
•	 Ride not more than two abreast (single file 
is safest).
•	 Keep to the right side of the roadway.
•	 Give pedestrians the right of way.
•	 Use hand signals before turning and stop-

39
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
Dakota Century Code. Review your owners 
manual before operating.
•	 Cross streets or highways at an angle of ap-
proximately 90 degrees to the direction of 
the highway and at a place where no ob-
struction prevents a quick and safe cross-
ing. Come to a complete stop before cross-
ing the shoulder or main-traveled roadway. 
You must yield the right of way to all road-
way traffic. When crossing a divided high-
way, cross only at an intersection of the 
highway with another street or highway.
•	 Except in emergencies, you may not oper-
ate within the right of way of any controlled-
access highway.
•	 A person who is performing pest control or 
survey work for a political subdivision may 
operate an off-highway vehicle on the bot-
tom, back slope, inside slope, and shoulder 
of a highway other than a controlled-access 
highway.
•	 A licensed driver may operate a registered 
off-highway vehicle:
	» On a gravel, dirt, or loose surface roadway.
	» On a paved highway designated and 
posted at a speed not exceeding 55 mph.
•	  A licensed driver over 16 years of age may 
operate a registered class III off-highway 
vehicle on a paved highway designated and 
posted at a speed not exceeding 65 mph.
•	 All off-highway vehicles operated on paved 
highways or gravel, dirt, or loose surface 
roadways must meet the equipment require-
ment in 39-29 of the North Dakota Century 
Code.
SNOWMOBILES
In order to operate a snowmobile on a high-
way right of way, you must have in your pos-
session a valid driver’s license or a snow-
mobile safety certificate issued by the North 
Dakota Parks and Recreation Department. 
For complete information on minimum age 
requirements, call 328-5357 or visit www.
parkrec.nd.gov.
Equipment
Your snowmobile must have:
•	 A headlight.
•	 A taillight.
•	 Brakes. 
•	 A leakproof exhaust system which includes 
a muffler.
Snowmobile Rules
There are a number of different rules regulat-
ing when and where you can operate a snow-
mobile. Here are some of them.
•	 Persons under the age of 18 must wear a 
safety helmet that meets United States De-
partment of Transportation standards.
•	 Never operate a snowmobile on the road-
way, shoulder, or inside bank of any road in 
North Dakota.
•	 Never operate on the right of way of any In-
terstate highway. The right of way includes 
the driving portion of the road, the median, 
the shoulders, and the ditches on either 
side.
•	 If you operate in any ditch alongside the 
roadway, move in the same direction as 
roadway traffic.
•	 Never operate on any right of way from April 
1 to November 1 of any year.
•	 If you must cross a roadway, yield the right 
of way to all roadway traffic. Come to a 
complete stop before reaching the shoulder 
of the road; proceed at right angles to the 
road when it is clear.
•	 On a divided highway, cross only at inter-
sections.
•	 When required for your safety and that of 
others, use your headlights and taillights.
•	 Never operate while under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs.
•	 Do not harass any animals with your snow-
mobile. You are liable for damages.
•	 Never operate where your machine will 
damage trees and plants.
•	 Do not operate on private land without per-
mission.

40
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
POINT SYSTEM
North Dakota uses a point system to improve 
safety on the roads. Under the North Dakota 
point system, each traffic violation is assigned 
a certain amount of points. The more serious 
the offense, the higher its point value. After 
each violation, the corresponding amount of 
points are added to the driver’s record. This 
normally occurs within 10 days of convic-
tion. When the record reveals a total of 12 or 
more points, the driver will be informed that 
the authorities intend to suspend his or her 
license. The driver will also be notified that he 
or she may have an administrative hearing. 
If it is found to be true that the driver in ques-
tion has 12 or more points, the license will be 
suspended according to the following table:
The point total can be reduced:
1.	ONE POINT—for every three-month peri-
od during which the driver has not had any 
points recorded against his/her record.
2.	THREE POINTS—if the driver completes 
an approved driver improvement course 
such as a defensive driving course.
3.	A person may elect to attend a driver im-
provement course in lieu of points on the 
driving record for violations assigned five 
or less points. This option is valid once ev-
ery 12 months and may not be used in con-
junction with item 2 above.
PARENT/GUARDIAN DRIVER 
COACHING TIPS
 WITHDRAWAL OF PARENTAL CONSENT
Consent of a parent or legal guardian is re-
quired for a minor to get a permit or a license. 
The person who consented can withdraw the 
consent at any time and the permit or license 
will be cancelled. A teen can regain their permit 
or license with parental consent or when they 
reach the age of 18.
DRIVING RISKS — What Parents Need to 
Know
Driving can be a potentially dangerous en-
deavor for everyone; however, it is more dan-
gerous for young drivers. Novice teen drivers 
crash more than any other age group. There 
are many reasons for this, including:
•	 Young Age/Lack of Maturity: Teenagers 
can make more errors in judgment than oth-
er age groups. Be aware your teen is likely 
to drive differently and take more risks when 
you are not in the vehicle. 
•	 Brain Development: Teens should be the 
world’s best drivers. Their muscles are well 
toned, their reaction time quick, their eye-
hand coordination at a peak. Yet car crash-
es kill more of them than any other cause — 
a problem, some researchers believe, that 
is rooted in the adolescent brain. A National 
Institutes of Health study suggests that the 
region of the brain that inhibits risky behav-
ior is not fully formed until age 25. 
•	 Risky Driving Behaviors: Teenagers may 
engage in risky driving behaviors. These 
include speeding, running red and yellow 
lights, running stop signs, tailgating, weav-
ing in and out of traffic, not keeping a safe 
distance for merging or changing lanes, 
misjudging gaps in traffic, and misjudging 
the capability of their vehicle.
•	 Distractions: Any new or inexperienced 
driver is challenged when faced with driving 
distractions. Music, cell phones, pets, and 
passengers are best left at home while your 
teen is learning to drive. 
•	 Driving Inexperience: Teenagers lack driv-
ing experience. It takes a LOT of practice 
to be able to safely maneuver in everyday 
situations and unexpected circumstances. 
Teens show the greatest improvement with-
in the first year and 1,000 miles of driving. 
They continue to improve through their first 
5,000 miles of driving.
HIGH-RISK DRIVING CONDITIONS
•	 Driving under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs: Drinking any — yes, any — amount 
Accumulated Point 
Total
Period of Suspension
12
7 days
13 and above
7 days for each point 
over 11

41
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
of alcohol produces impairment. Not only is 
the use of alcohol and illicit drugs illegal, the 
combination of alcohol or drugs and driving 
can be deadly.
•	 High Speeds: For teen drivers (especially 
males), most severe crashes occur at high 
speeds. Crash risk, severity, and force all 
increase as speed increases.
•	 Passengers: For teen drivers, as the num-
ber of passengers increase, teen crashes 
increase. Driving is a “new skill” for teens, 
and they need to pay close attention. Teen 
passengers can be a major distraction. Teen 
passengers may intentionally or unintention-
ally encourage friends to speed, show off, or 
not pay enough attention to driving.
•	 Night Driving: For teen drivers, the most 
severe crashes occur at night and on week-
ends. Night driving is challenging for all driv-
ers, but novice teen drivers do not have the 
experience to anticipate and react to condi-
tions at night when visibility is reduced. Make 
sure your teen gets extensive practice driv-
ing with you in varied types of weather. Be 
aware that teenagers driving at night usually 
include a lack of adult supervision, carrying 
passengers, and driving at high speeds, all 
of which increase risk exponentially. 
•	 Seat Belt Non-Use: Seat belt non-use is a 
problem for both drivers and passengers. 
Seat belts are important because they keep 
the driver and passengers inside the vehicle 
where they are the safest.
Driver education is the beginning of the 
process of learning to drive, but teens need 
many, many hours of practice to become safe 
drivers. 
TIPS FOR SUPERVISING TEEN DRIVING
PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE!! Prac-
tice as much as possible, even after your teen 
gets their license.
•	 Who: Practice with only you and your teen 
in the vehicle. Other people, pets, etc., can 
distract both of you and increase stress. Re-
member: remain calm and focused; making 
mistakes is part of learning, and practice 
driving is serious, but it should also be inter-
esting and engaging.
•	 What: Practice the driving skills yourself that 
your teen is learning. Begin with basic skills 
such as turning, parking, and backing up. 
Then, practice more complex skills such as 
changing lanes and merging.
•	 When: In the beginning, practice during day-
light hours with good weather. As your teen’s 
skills increase, gradually expose them to 
different roads, weather conditions, and 
times of day.
•	 Where: In the beginning, practice in safe, 
low-risk driving areas. Start out in empty 
parking lots or on remote roads. As your 
teen’s skills increase, progress to quiet 
neighborhood streets and later to busier 
roads and highways.
•	 Why: Learning to drive is a complex, on-
going process requiring responsibility and 
dedication from both parents and teens. 
New drivers need a lot of practice to handle 
daily driving hazards and unexpected situa-
tions. Teens will show the greatest improve-
ment in the first 1,000 to 5,000 miles of driving.
Do These Each Time You Practice
•	 Be in the “practicing mood.” Practice 
when both of you are ready, in good moods, 
have sufficient time, and are well rested.
•	 Adjust mirrors, seat belts, seats, and 
steering wheel position before starting 
the vehicle.  
•	 Always wear your seat belts and use 
your headlights day and night! 
•	 Come to a complete stop at stop signs 
and for right turns at red lights.
•	 When proceeding from a stop look left, 
then front (straight ahead), then right before 
proceeding.
•	 Keep your eyes moving. Use your mirrors 
to check around and behind the vehicle ev-
ery 6-8 seconds.

42
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
•	 Keep at least a 3-4 second space between 
your vehicle and others in traffic flow. Try to 
stay centered in your lane of travel. 
•	 Avoid the “No-Zone” with trucks or bus-
es. This is about 15 feet on all sides of the 
truck. If you cannot see truck drivers in their 
mirrors, they cannot see you either.
•	 Be aware—Speed increases braking dis-
tance. Doubling your speed will quadruple 
your braking distance. The faster you’re go-
ing, the longer it takes to stop.
•	 Be aware—Vehicle weight increases 
braking distance. Doubling your vehicle 
weight will double your braking distance. If 
you are driving a large vehicle or towing a 
trailer it takes longer to stop.
North Dakota law sets requirements for teen 
driving, but families need to determine other 
rules and limits for their teen drivers. Make 
sure that family rules are very clear from the 
beginning. Talk to your teen about driving 
every chance you get.
USE A PARENT-TEEN DRIVING 
AGREEMENT
Use a Parent-Teen Driving Agreement to de-
termine appropriate rules and guidelines for 
your teen driver, and to make sure everyone 
is clear about them! A sample agreement can 
be found on the internet at www.dot.nd.gov/di-
visions/safety/teens-parents.htm under “Edu-
cation.”
DRIVING RULES/GUIDELINES FOR 
YOUR FAMILY
•	 Require Seat Belt Use: This applies to 
your teen and all passengers at all times.
•	 Prohibit Alcohol and/or Drug Use: This 
applies to your teen as the driver of any ve-
hicle.
•	 Prohibit Riding with Someone Who Has 
Used Alcohol or Drugs: This applies to 
your teen as the passenger in another ve-
hicle. 
•	 Require Compliance With Speed Lim-
its: Stress that this applies to all roads at 
all times because crash forces at higher 
speeds kill. 
•	 Prohibit Distractions While Driving: Pro-
hibit cell phone use, eating, drinking, pets or 
changing radio or CDs while driving. 
•	 Require a Full Report: Require informa-
tion about each trip before leaving, includ-
ing where your teen is going, with whom, 
and when they will return so that you know 
where they are. 
PROVIDE A SAFE, RELIABLE VEHICLE 
FOR YOUR TEEN
•	 Mid- to full-size sedans and station wagons 
with smaller engines and airbags are safest 
for teen drivers.
•	 Under certain conditions, small trucks and 
SUVs may be more prone to roll-overs than 
other types of vehicles.
•	 High-performance cars may encourage 
teens to drive beyond their experience level.
IMPOSE CONSEQUENCES FOR 
VIOLATING RULES/GUIDELINES
•	 Make consequences relate to losing driv-
ing privileges: for a day, weekend, week, 
month, etc., depending on the violation. 
•	 Consequences not related to losing driving 
privileges will not be as effective in sending 
the messages: “You must be a responsible 
driver” and “I am serious about your follow-
ing the rules and limits for driving.”
•	 Consider requiring your teen to complete 
additional supervised practice. 
Make consequences known: Set conse-
quences for common violations before they 
occur so that your teen knows what to expect.
•	 Getting a speeding ticket.
•	 Coming home less than 30 minutes after 
curfew.
•	 Coming home more than 30 minutes after 
curfew.
•	 Lying about their whereabouts.

43
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
•	 Violating passenger restrictions.
In North Dakota, teen drivers account for 
about 20 percent of fatal crashes. 
So, before you ever get into the car, make 
sure that both you and your teen 
understand the basics.
TEEN-DRIVER TRAINING ORIENTATION
Before you begin training, make sure you 
know common teen driving errors and ways 
you can help your teen be a better driver. 
Top 11 Driving Errors
  1.	Not attending to the path of travel.
  2.	Driving five or more miles per hour too 
fast for conditions.
  3.	Driving too fast through a curve.
  4.	Inadequate search at an intersection and 
failing to yield to cross traffic.
  5.	Lack of attention at an intersection and 
being struck by another driver.
  6.	Improper evasive action — quick turn not 
executed properly.
  7.	Failure to maintain visual lead.
  8.	Failure to see action developing at side of 
the roadway.
  9.	Following too closely.
10.	Willfully taking right-of-way.
11.	 Distracted.
AGGRESSIVE DRIVING
Drivers who routinely speed, run red lights 
and stop signs, tailgate, and otherwise disre-
gard the safety of other motorists are turning 
streets and highways into high-risk arenas. 
Aggressive driving can easily escalate into 
road rage. We’re all too familiar with stories 
of motorists who have killed or injured other 
drivers for seemingly trivial reasons.
When is it Aggressive Driving? 
The following attitudes and behaviors indicate 
that problem driving behaviors are related to 
aggression rather than inexperience:
•	 Constant rushing, lane jumping, and the 
need to “get ahead.”
•	 Ignoring road signs and regulations.
•	 Constantly ridiculing and criticizing other 
drivers.
•	 Denying entry into your lane or preventing 
passing.
•	 Speeding past another car, revving engine.
•	 Tailgating a driver to go faster or get out of 
their way.
•	 Honking, yelling, or making visible insulting 
gestures.
When Confronted by Aggressive Drivers:
•	 First and foremost, make every attempt to 
get out of their way.
•	 Put your pride in the back seat. Do not chal-
lenge them by speeding up or attempting to 
“hold-your-own” in your travel lane.
•	 Wear your seat belt. It will hold you in your 
seat and behind the wheel in case you need 
to make an abrupt driving maneuver and it 
will protect you in a crash.
•	 Avoid eye contact.
•	 Ignore gestures and refuse to return them.
•	 Report aggressive drivers to the appropri-
ate authorities by providing a vehicle de-
scription, license number, location, and if 
possible, direction of travel.
•	 If you have a cell phone, and can do it safe-
ly, call 911.

44
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
NOTES
The exercise above illustrates the area 
around the car the driver cannot see:
•	 While your teen is sitting in the driver’s seat 
with the engine off, get out of the car and 
stand close to the front bumper facing the 
driver.
•	 Begin taking steps backward and have your 
teen tap the horn when he or she can see 
your feet. 
•	 Place a cone or cup in that spot. This is the 
pavement area in front of the vehicle that 
cannot be seen when looking out of the 
windshield.
•	
•	 Ask the driver to use the inside mirror and/
or to look over the right shoulder, and re-
peat this process to the rear of the vehicle. 
•	 Walk backwards from the passenger doors 
on the left and right sides of the vehicle and 
place cups or cones to mark the side areas 
visible to the driver. 
•	 Have your teen measure these distances 
and record them.
AN EXERCISE TO BECOME FAMILIAR WITH BLIND SPOTS

45
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
SUPERVISED DRIVING LOG
Instruction permit holders under the age of 16 must complete a minimum of 50 hours of super-
vised, behind-the-wheel driving experience in various driving conditions that include:
•	 Driving in rural areas.
•	 Driving in urban areas.
•	 Driving on gravel, dirt, or aggregate surface roads.
•	 Night driving.
•	 Driving in winter conditions.
The log below will help you keep track of the hours required. Please note that the 50 hours 
of supervised driving is in addition to the formal drivers education requirements.
Driving Log: Must practice driving in each 
of these conditions. When added together, 
must total a minimum of 50 hours.
Hours
Hours
Hours
Hours
Hours
Hours
Hours
Rural Areas
Urban Areas
Gravel/Dirt/Aggregate Road Surfaces
Night Driving
Winter Driving
TOTAL HOURS
 Notes:

46
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025
Find out how
to get REAL ID.
dot.nd.gov/realid
SCAN HERE!

47
Noncommercial Driver License Manual
Revised 2025 
www.ndsc.org
For more information, call
701-223-6372 or 800-932-8890
In-Person Courses
Public Course (voluntary): $60
Distance-Learning Courses
Public Course (voluntary): $80
Alive at 25 is a highly interactive 4.5-hour program targeted 
toward drivers under the age of 25 that helps young drivers take 
greater responsibility for their driving. Whereas driver education 
teaches the mechanics of car and road handling and state law, 
Alive at 25 focuses on behavior, judgment, decision making and 
consequences, and provides tools for making positive choices.
Defensive Driving course 
also available for
experienced drivers.
But you can give them the tools to be safer.
Plus, courses are approved in ND for 
insurance discount and point reduction!
10% Discount
Use coupon code NDDOT

INDEX
Aggressive Driving. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
Air Bags. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
Alcohol. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
Applying for a License or Permit. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
Backing. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
Bicycles - Sharing the Road . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
Blindspots - Become Familiar. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
Change of Name or Address. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
Child Restraints (Car Safety Seats). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
Classes of Licenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
Coasting Prohibited. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Crash Reports. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
Distracted Driving . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Driving Posture. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Driving Risks - What Parents Need to Know. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
Driving Rules/Guidelines for Your Family . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
Driving While Under the Influence. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
Drugs. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
Duplicate Licenses/Permits. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
Equipment Failure. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Examinations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
Exemptions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
Fatigue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Flat Tire or Blowouts. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Flooding. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
Following & Stopping Distances. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
Hand Signals. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
High-Risk Driving Conditions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
Implied Consent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
Impose Consequences for Violating Rules/Guidelines. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
Interchanges. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
Interstate Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
Lane Changes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21

Littering. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
Minor in Possession/Consumption Law. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
Minors Driver License. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
Motorcycles - Sharing the Road . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
Special Hazards. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
Night Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
Open Container Law. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
Parent-Teen Driving Agreement . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
Parking
Do Not Park. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Emergency Parking. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Leaving a Parking Space. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Parallel Parking. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
Parking on a Hill. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
Passing. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
Pavement Markings. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
Pedestrians. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
People Who Cannot Get a License. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
Permits . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
Point System. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
Provide a Safe, Reliable Vehicle for Your Teen. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
Railroad Crossings . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
Rain. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
Reading the Road. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Recreational Vehicles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
Bicycles and Motorized Bicycles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
Off-Highway Vehicles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
Snowmobiles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
Registering Your Motor Vehicle. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
Renewals. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
Reporting Impaired Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
Restrictions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
Right of Way. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
Roundabouts. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23

Running off the Pavement. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
Seat Belts . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
Signals
Flashing Indications. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
Left Turn Indications. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
Traffic Signals. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
Signs
Guide. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
Pedestrian. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
Regulatory. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
School . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
Special Warning. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
Warning. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
Skids. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
Speed Limits. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
Stop Intersections. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
Teen-Driver Training Orientation. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
Top 11 Driving Errors. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
Teen Driving - Tips for Supervising. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
Do These Each Time You Practice . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
Towing. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Trucks - Sharing the Road. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
Blind Spots (the “No-Zone”). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
Braking. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
Maneuverability. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
Turning. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
Turning . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
Wear Your Belt Correctly. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
Winter Driving. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
Meeting Snow Removal Equipment. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
Withdrawal of Parental Consent. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
Work Zone
Channelizing Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
Construction and Maintenance Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
Flagpersons. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
Flashing Arrow Panels. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
Safety Tips. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14

It is NDDOT’s policy that all employees have the right to work in an environment free of harassment. 
An employee may discontinue service to a customer if the customer subjects the employee to conduct, 
communication, or sexually explicit paraphernalia which may interfere with the employee’s work perfor-
mance or create a hostile, intimidating, or offensive work environment.
Under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and its related statutes and regulations, no person or groups 
of persons shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, or income status, be 
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination 
under any and all programs, services, or activities administered by the North Dakota Department of 
Transportation.

www.dot.nd.gov
